P e r v asi v e D isp l a y s

A Survey of Pervasive
Displays for Information
Presentation
This survey of three different pervasive display technologies used for
information presentation—traditional 2D display media, urban media
facades, and novel display hardware—identifies five emerging trends
that cross all three technologies.

U

sing pervasive technology for
information presentation has
been at the core of the ubiquitous computing vision since its
inception. In his seminal article
on ubicomp, Marc Weiser observed that our
natural environments convey a wealth of information that can be readily absorbed and yet still
deliver a positive user experience.1 In contrast, he noted
that interactions with comSarah Clinch and Jason Alexander
paratively information-poor
Lancaster University
computing were considerably
Sven Gehring
more frustrating:

German Research Center for
Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)

There is more information
available at our fingertips
during a walk in the woods
than any computer system, yet people find
a walk among the trees relaxing and computers frustrating.

Since this challenge was first articulated,
the research community has invested significant effort in the domain of so-called
“pervasive displays” using a wide range of
technologies. Although this term could be
considered to envelope a wide range of devices, here we focus on screens embedded
into public and semipublic spaces, with the

14 PER VA SI V E computing

explicit purpose of displaying digital content to multiple viewers (typically simultaneously). Such displays range from tablet
or TV-style displays that have been affixed
to features of the internal or external environment and are visible only within a short
distance, to large-scale media facades that
are embedded into the very architecture of a
space and can be viewed from long distances
by a huge number of people.
In this article, we focus on systems designed specifically to present information of
the type Weiser foresaw (as opposed to entertainment or advertising content, for example), reviewing three significant classes of
pervasive display technologies: conventional
2D displays, urban media facades, and bespoke or novel hardware. All three technology areas have a rich history of use for information presentation (displaying news, public
transport information, and so on), although
the expected viewing or interaction models
can shape the level of detail or information
formatting. For example, many of the urban
media facade examples discussed provide
limited information arranged in a format
designed primarily for its artistic or entertainment qualities.
No one of these three technologies is a panacea for information presentation, but together

Published by the IEEE CS n 1536-1268/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEE

they offer the opportunity to provide
pervasive information display. Although not intended to be comprehensive, this survey focuses on key
milestone systems for each technology
approach, providing an overview of the
current direction of pervasive information presentation systems and identifying emerging trends. Despite considerable differences in both the mediums
and applications, we identify five interesting cross-cutting themes for pervasive displays as used for information
presentation.

Large 2D Screens and
Projections
Large 2D screens and projections are
proliferating as a means of presenting
information in many public and semipublic spaces. Early research focused
on the use of single screens in workplace environments; for example, the
Learning Communities Newspaper2
took the form of a Web-based application projected in a shared space used
by members of the Learning Communities group at Apple. News stories
were submitted by group members,
via email, to inform other members
and guests about their project work
and events.
Deployments of one or more isolated
displays (as opposed to tiled multiscreen environments) have continued
to be important in the workplace.
For example, the AwareMedia 3 deployment of 10 displays (mostly large
touchscreens) was designed to raise
awareness and support messaging
within the surgical ward of a hospital.
The screens were information-heavy,
detailing the location of individuals,
the schedule for specific areas of the
ward, and current relevant surgical
records, and providing video and messaging between locations. Evaluation
interviews three months into the deployment suggested that the displays
were a useful tool for supporting staff
and informing their behavior.
Another approach using 2D screens
and projections is the creation of

July–septemBer 2016

multiscreen environments that combine multiple screens or projectors
to build visually immersive environments for information presentation
at very large scales; such displays are
particularly useful for the visualization and analysis of large complex da-

leases, and event details.7 The majority of displays in the network are 40inch traditional LCD screens that have
been affixed to walls inside campus
buildings (including residential areas
and lecture theaters). By contrast, the
UBI-hotspots deployment8 in Oulu,

Although this was an ambient visualization of
public data... only those familiar with the system
understood the communicated data.
tasets. For example, early cave automatic virtual environments (CAVEs)
were constructed from three or more
projected displays 4 that created a
walk-in cube-shaped room. Interactions with the information visualizations in the CAVE were supported
through a variety of hand-held input devices (such as data gloves or
a joystick), and trials demonstrated
use in a wide range of informationintensive applications (including 3D
medical imaging, architectural walkthroughs, and exploration of astrophysics simulation data). Similar deployments have been created using
traditional panel displays—such as
the wall-sized interaction with large
datasets (WILD) room. 5
Beyond workplace and laboratory environments, conventional
displays now abound. The CityWall6 research screen was deployed
in Helsinki, Finland, to show information during large events. The
screen supported multiple simultaneous interacting users through its
large multitouch display. Large networked research deployments, composed of multiple screens, are also
well-established. For example, the
e-Campus deployment at Lancaster
University uses almost 50 screens
across the university campus to show
a variety of relevant information such
as bus times, local weather, press re-

Finland, (which provides a wide array of information and applications)
features 12 custom-built display units
that are installed in indoor and outdoor city center locations. Large-scale
networked display deployments are
also commonplace in the advertising
domain (see, for example, www.infoscreen.de).
Projections are also a common approach for creating temporary installations in urban spaces. For example,
a recent projection onto the Empire
State Building in New York used the
building as a platform for raising
awareness of endangered species.9 The
projected display used 40 stacked projectors to create a 57 × 115 meter display that could be viewed from considerable distance and looped through
digital images of endangered species
in order to act as a “weapon of mass
instruction” that informed the local
public.
As LCD and projected displays
are deployed in increasingly variable
spaces, the challenge of managing the
presented information also increases.
Space users are not typically homogenous (perhaps varying over the course
of a day or week) and are engaged in
different tasks, so providing display
content to inform this wide user base
poses a significant challenge. Furthermore, as displays move from isolated nodes to large-scale networks

PER VA SI V E computing 15

Pervasive Displays

(such as those we’ve described), the
variety of locations add to the challenges associated with a highly varied
audience.
Two approaches can help improve
the relevance and efficacy of such displays: the first, situatedness, relates
to the tailoring of displayed media

without equipping the building with
extensive technology, particularly
when creating displays with a 3D
form factor.

Urban Media Facades
As large 2D screens have moved into
cities, they have been increasingly

Media facades are a prominent example of how
we experience urban spaces and how information
can be displayed.
to the specific location of the screen.
This might vary from simply tailoring the clock or weather to local conditions, to displaying community-relevant content, and even to displaying
hyper-local travel information (such
as the next bus to depart from the
specific bus stop at which the display
is located). The second, personalization, refers to the adaptation of content for the specific user (or group of
users) standing in front of a display
(for example, to show feeds from
their preferred news source or to
show the time of the next bus back
to their homes). Research suggests
that users increasingly expect to see
situated content,10 and demographic
information provided by video analytics systems is beginning to enable
personalized digital media on public
displays.
Overall, large 2D screens and projections provide an accessible technology for information presentation that
can be embedded into most indoor
and outdoor locations, as reflected
in the wealth of such screens in our
everyday environments. Although
cheap and accessible, the installation
of these displays can disrupt the aesthetics of a space. As an alternative
approach, in urban public spaces,
projections are often used for turning building facades into large screens

16

PER VA SI V E computing 

embedded in the fabric of the very
buildings themselves. Known collectively as media facades, such installations have rapidly increased over
the past decade.11,12 Media facades
are a prominent example of how we
experience urban spaces and how information can be displayed and made
interactive. The research community
has already made rich contributions
in understanding urban spaces and
the role and opportunities of media
facades.
However, designers and researchers are often in a rush to create new
installations and remediate previous
media forms13 and conceptual approaches for urban spaces. Such an
approach is not necessarily sensitive
to concerns about people, place, architecture, or urban design, suggesting the need for new understandings
of these designed objects and how
they shape our experience of built
and urban environments.14 Mid-sized
urban screens, such as video walls
and digital billboards, are often just
used as digital replacements for analog billboards. Due to their technical
capabilities, they provide the advantage of displaying rapidly changing
content, including animations and
videos.
In contrast to video walls, media facades are usually very large. Due to

their physical and digital properties,
as well as the public setting in which
they’re usually situated, we face novel
challenges when designing and developing digital content for media facades. The size of a media facade can
vary from moderately small facades of
50 m 2 , such as that at the Academy of
Fine Arts Saar in Saarbrücken, Germany (www.hbksaar.de); to mediumsized ones, such as the one at the ARS
Electronica Center in Linz, Austria
(www.aec.at), covering 5,000 m 2; or
very large ones, such as the one at
Allianz Arena in Munich, Germany
(www.allianz-arena.de), with an area
of 25,500 m 2 . As a result of their
enormous size, media facades can be
visible from great distances, resulting
in broad exposure of the content displayed on the facade.
Peter Dalsgaard and Kim Halskov
explored various types of media facade installations, identifying eight key
challenges that need to be faced in such
a public context.15 These challenges
consider a wide range of issues, including that, due to the public context, urban settings call for new or adapted
forms of interfaces. Displayed content
has to suit the medium. It must match
the technical properties of the facade
and support the potentially intended
interactions.
Furthermore, stakeholder interests
must be balanced. This can be a critical issue, because the majority of media facades are owned by companies or
public institutions enforcing strict rules
about their presence in public. Consequently, it’s important to understand
that the presented content and visualized data will be exposed to a large audience in a public space. Together with
the huge variety of supported media
facade resolutions—they’re often very
low compared to regular computer
screens and situated public displays—
this large-scale data exposure is one of
the most important constraints for visualizing data on urban screens.
Although tools exist16 for developing
and prototyping—and even interacting

www.computer.org/pervasive

with—content and visualizations for
media facades of arbitrary complexity,
it’s still uncommon to visualize complex or even people-related data. Besides displaying image content in the
form of digital advertisements, a common way of visualizing data in urban
spaces is simply communicating quantitative data, such as traffic, weather,
and air conditions. Usually, the data is
visualized in an ambient fashion using
color schemes and abstract animations.
Using concrete numbers and detailed
information is rather rare.
In “City Bug Report: Urban Prototyping as Participatory Process and
Practice,” Henrik Korsgaard and Martin Brynskov described their installation in Aarhus, Denmark.17 Their
deployment explored the concepts of
digital policy, transparency, and the
impact of digitization on the changing
roles of city administration and the
(digital) public.17 The installation took
the form of a media facade composed
of 13 LED pixel arrays mounted on the
exterior of the city hall tower in Aarhus. Simple color sequences were used
to represent communication between
citizens and the city administration
providing a semantic connection to an
online platform for citizen feedback
and reporting issues within the city.
The facade presented a visualization
of open records on civic communication between the city departments and
citizens. Although this was an ambient visualization of public data showing colored dots around the tower,
only those that were familiar with the
system understood the communicated
data. The majority of passersby perceived the installation as a simple light
installation.
An early and well-known media
facade installation visualizing image data was the Blinkenlights project in Berlin, Germany.11 The upper eight floors of an office building
were turned into the world’s biggest
(at that time) interactive computer
screen. To control the content, people
could use their mobile phones to call a

July–septemBer 2016

dedicated phone number which, when
connected, allowed them to use their
phone’s keypad to either control a virtual cursor on the facade or activate
a previously uploaded animation. The
only restriction for the visualized data
was the comparably low resolution of
8 × 18 pixels.

animations and media content. When
walking past the facade, the walking
direction is mapped to animated arrows indicating the walking direction. When people stop and stand in
front of the facade, they can create
further animations through body
gestures. These animations range

Using novel display hardware for information
presentation has significant potential to enable
“calm” interaction.
Another common data visualization in urban spaces is the presentation of passerby movement patterns.
The movements are usually tracked
with cameras and are often mapped
to animated silhouettes or animated
lights. For example, the installation
12m4s from LAb[au] (www.lab-au.
com) featured an interactive media
facade installation based on average
walking speed.18 This architectural
intervention used the movements of
passersby to generate a real-time visualization. The researchers assumed
an average walking speed of 12 meters in approximately four seconds,
and the movements of passersby were
tracked in real-time with cameras to
generate a visual (3D particles) and
auditory (granular synthesis) scape
on the facade, based on the captured
image data and ultrasound sensors.
The visualization was based on the
position, orientation, and speed of a
passerby.
Similarly, the building of the organization La Vitrine Culturelle in
Montreal, Canada, is equipped with
a small, low-resolution media facade
of approximately 23 m 2 consisting of
35,000 RGB LEDs that change their
color as a reaction to the movements
of passersby.12 By connecting the interaction to the movements of passersby, the installation provides various

from snowflakes popping up around
the user’s silhouette, to movable light
spots.
In additional to light-emitting media facades, which can be compared to
common digital displays, mechanical
media facades—where the outer surface of the building consists of mechanical elements that can be physically
altered—sometimes come with data
visualization as a side effect.11,12 When
the mechanically movable elements are
used as shades adapting to the current
position of the sun, their particular
position reflects the position and intensity of the sun in a rather abstract
way.

Bespoke and Novel Hardware
Both CAVE-like configurations and urban display deployments are typically
built using conventional display technologies in which flat, 2D pixel arrays
(such as LCD screens) provide high-resolution visual output. However, early
information presentation prototypes
that emerged from efforts to attain
Weiser’s vision for “calm” computing19
often took more novel forms based on
nontraditional hardware, and the use
of novel display hardware continues to
be a valuable medium for information
presentation.
An early example is Natalie Jeremijenko’s Dangling String,19 comprised

PER VA SI V E computing 17

Pervasive Displays

Figure 1. Emerge, a physically dynamic bar chart. 25 Users can directly or indirectly
manipulate data points. (Source: Faisal Taher; used with permission.)

of an 8-foot piece of plastic spaghetti
(string) hanging from a stepper motor
connected to a nearby Ethernet cable.
As data was transmitted over the network, the electrical signals caused the
motor to turn, resulting in movement
of the string and yielding a peripheral
audible and visual indication of the
level of traffic.
Since this early work, ambient displays have taken a variety of forms using natural and mechanical materials.
For example, the LaughingLily20 provided an artificial plant mechanized
to reflect the types of conversation
occurring in a meeting room (silence,
productive conversation, or arguments), and the more recent Clouds
installation at the Open University21
used 24 custom-built spheres to display the number of people using the
stairs and elevator in the building.
The spheres were hung from the ceiling and were equally divided into two
halves (differentiated through use of
different colors): half represented elevator use and the other half represented use of the stairs. Each set of 12
spheres could be moved closer to the

18

PER VA SI V E computing 

ceiling or floor to reflect the changing use of stairs and elevator; vertical
distance between the Clouds indicated
the difference between the number of
people taking the stairs versus those
taking the elevator.
Although useful for all kinds of
peripheral information presentation, the physicality of many novel
displays provides an ideal medium
for scenarios such as data visualization, because users can manipulate
the presented data, letting them gain
deeper insights. Indeed, researchers have recently identified a role for
such hardware in promoting engagement with public displays, and encouraging reflection on the information displayed. 22 One such example
combined a traditional digital screenbased data visualization with physical data plates cut to the shape of the
line graphs associated with subsets
of the data. These two data mediums
were combined to form a single boxshaped display that was deployed in
urban space. Study of the user interactions showed that the presence of
physical data plates resulted in more

comparisons between different data
subsets when compared to an identical deployment with only the digital
display; the plates therefore led users to generate much deeper insights
about the data. 22
While these examples combined
a traditional 2D screen with a set of
physical but static data representations, the next generation of displays
will take a different form—their physical geometry will dynamically change
shape, reconfiguring their presence in
3D space to better represent the underlying content. Actuated shape-changing displays fundamentally transform
our understanding of “displays” from
a flat 2D pixel arrays to physically dynamic visual outputs. These displays
use our visual and tactile senses to exploit the perceived affordances inherent in everyday physical objects.23 For
data visualization, this means displays
will feature an additional information
channel—the physical dimension—to
better convey features and meaning,
while exploiting the viewers’ rich visual and tactile senses. These novel
shape-changing displays move toward
Ivan Sutherland’s vision for the “ultimate display,”24 where a computer controls the existence and form of matter.
The majority of current examples
of shape-changing displays are 2.5D
displays—flat surfaces that host actuated physical pins to generate deformed display surfaces. Faisal Taher
and his colleagues review the literature of shape-changing displays used
for data presentation, 25 noting that
such displays are typically controlled
using motorized pins, pneumatics, or
shape-memory alloys. (A continually
evolving list of shape-changing interfaces is available at www.shapechange.org.) Furthermore, their resolutions vary from a few physical pixels
(< 10) to 900. 23 As a method of capturing the shape-change capabilities
of different displays, Anne Roudaut
and her colleagues describe “shaperesolution,”26 analogous to measures
of screen-size, resolution, and so on,

www.computer.org/pervasive

that consumers are familiar with in
typical displays.
Much like traditional displays, many
shape-changing displays are built as
generic output devices. For example,
the emerging area of data physicalization deals with “physical artefacts
whose geometry or material properties
encode data.”27 To explicitly explore
this domain, Taher and his colleagues
constructed Emerge, 25 a physically
dynamic bar chart consisting of 100
self-illuminating bars that vertically
actuate to create physical 3D data representations (see Figure 1). Users can
directly or indirectly manipulate data
points (including pulling and pushing
bars and interacting with axis labels)
to visualize the information through
annotation, filtering, organization,
and navigation. In a similar vein, Sean
Follmer and his colleagues demonstrated physical representations of
mathematical functions using the 900
actuating bars of inFORM. 23
As a first step toward commercialization of physical shape-changing
interfaces, Tactus Technology’s Phorm
(www.tactustechnology.com) extrudes
small buttons from an iPad’s display to
aid typing on touchscreens. Expansion
of this concept—pumping micro-fluids
into a screen overlay—or using a modular shape-change toolkit such as ShapeClip, 28 would let developers transform
any traditional display into a novel
physically dynamic data visualizer.
An alternate view on shape-changing
interfaces is the use of developing display technologies such as augmented
reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and
holographic displays to present “untouchable” digital content either immersively (VR) or overlaid onto the
real world. For example, to overcome
the challenge of presenting high-resolution visual output in the same space as
physical output, Sublimate augmented
a shape-display with AR, demonstrating virtual mesh manipulation, geospatial data, and wind tunnel flow. 29
To generate 3D path visualizations,
LeviPath levitates and moves, in mid-

July–septemBer 2016

air, multiple small objects using acoustic standing waves. 30 Finger tracking
facilitates indirect input to manipulate
the placement of levitating objects.
Augmenting traditional objects for additional information presentation is
more commonplace, with a number of
commercial products available (see, for

with traditional displays, the “price
per pixel” will reduce as technology
develops and demand increases. Such
higher resolution shape-displays will
both better represent the required
data and allow significantly larger
datasets to be rendered. In the meantime, combinations of display tech-

Using novel display hardware for information
presentation has significant potential
to enable “calm” interaction.
example, www.layar.com and www.
wikitude.com).
Using novel display hardware for
information presentation has significant potential to enable “calm” interaction with the ever-growing set of
information now presented to users
in all aspects of their daily lives. Although research prototypes have continued to be developed since Weiser’s
early vision, many have been highly
tailored to a specific information presentation goal, and few have made
it to deployments outside of the lab.
Technologies such as AR, VR, and
shape-changing displays have the potential to generalize to numerous information presentation scenarios (for
example, researchers recently proposed using AR displays in domestic environments for human memory augmentation 31). In particular,
the use of shape-changing displays
provides an accessible presentation
medium that does not require the use
of personal wearables or devices.
However, this next generation of
display technology is still immature
and faces significant hurdles before
it is suitable for mainstream deployments. The biggest of these challenges
is improving the scale and resolution
of physical display hardware. While
progress is being made in both the
research and commercial sectors, as

nologies (such as Sublimate’s use
of high-resolution AR display and
physical output) can provide an intermediate step for this hardware
development. 29

Cross-Cutting Trends
The three presented technology
classes for pervasive information display each have something to offer—
no single approach currently appears
to be the ideal solution. Current deployments often use conventional
LCD screens, but media facades and
more varied display hardware are attracting considerable interest for accessible and engaging presentation of
information to users. Despite obvious
differences in the three mediums, five
cross-cutting trends emerged from
the surveyed literature: an increasing
emphasis on situatedness, growing
accessibility and a wider user base,
support for interaction, new application areas, and challenges in managing user attention.
An Emphasis on Situated Displays
Early information displays were typically based on dedicated presentation hardware that had little connection with its setting. However,
as displays become more varied and
commonplace, users have a growing
expectation that a display will have

PER VA SI V E computing 19

Pervasive Displays

some sense of situatedness—that is, it
will have a connection to the space in
which it’s embedded.10
For example, in the conventional
display domain, a clear shift can be
observed from immersive VR-based
systems such as CAVE 4 to situated
displays that specifically represent

environments, many early displays had
limited accessibility for the general
population, but the growing accessibility of displays has led researchers to
accommodate a diverse viewer audience. For example, the recent CityWall
deployment was explicitly designed to
support users, ranging from experts to

This next generation of display technology is
still immature and faces significant hurdles before
it is suitable for mainstream deployments.
changing activities in a space. 32 Media facades in particular are designed
to be embedded into an existing architectural space, exploiting its characteristics and therefore offering clear
potential for situatedness. Indeed, recent deployments, such as the 2014
City Bug report,17 have realized this
vision. Similarly, although innovations in shape-changing displays can
provide support for general information presentation, a long-standing
trend for novel hardware displays has
been the presentation of information
in a situated manner (such as Dangling
String19 and Clouds21).
In-situ information presentation has
a number of advantages over other
forms of information provision. First,
it offers users increased levels of trust
in the relationship between the physical space and the data being presented
(users typically associate ownership of
a display with the space in which it is
deployed7). Second, in-situ presentation
can rely on the physical space to frame
the information presented. Finally,
when techniques such as projection are
used, the physical space can become
part of the visualization itself.
A Rise in Nonexpert Users
A further trend is the growing set of
varied users encountering information displays. Embedded in research

20

PER VA SI V E computing 

children and senior citizens.6 Equally,
many media facades can be appreciated by users with varying degrees
of understanding of the information
presented. At one level, they can simply be considered as an aesthetic improvement to the space,17 but as users
develop an understanding of the visualization, they can read more of the information contained within.
Movement toward an increasingly
data-driven society is likely to see a
rapid increase in demand for data visualizations for nonexpert users. We expect pervasive displays to play an important role in meeting this need. The
public nature of many pervasive displays means they have huge potential
for accessible information and could
prove to be an important tool in helping to avoid the creation of a so-called
“digital-divide” based on information
availability.
Increased Support for Interaction
and Experimentation
Interaction has long been an important
theme for pervasive display researchers,
and it’s now commonplace for deployments to support some form of user
interaction. As interaction has emerged
as a more prominent feature of pervasive display deployments, there has
been a clear shift from relatively static
information presentation to highly in-

teractive systems. While early interactive systems relied on touchscreens and
dedicated input devices (such as mice,
data gloves, and joysticks), many now
feature interaction with the display
via smartphones11,33 or through direct
physical manipulation.25 The ability to
interact with data can help transform
a pervasive information display from a
simple ambient awareness tool to a sophisticated data-access point for viewers that enables browsing and potential
experimentation with the data being
visualized, leading to new insights.22
The production of interactive data
visualizations on media facades in urban settings is particularly interesting,
because it poses significant new challenges. In some cases, a display might
be visible by hundreds or thousands
of nearby citizens, so providing interactivity for both the large scale of the
physical display and its large user base
will require significant innovation.
More generally though, trends across
all three technologies indicate that, in
the near future, most pervasive displays
will support interaction, and viewers
will assume an ability to explore, control, and interact with the information
presented to them.
The Emergence of New
Applications
Early information presentation applications of pervasive displays were
largely focused on supporting the
workplace. More recently, news and
advertising information have become
commonplace. However, with the
trend toward situated displays, and a
wide user base, new applications have
started to emerge.
Perhaps the most common of these
are applications for behavior change
in which visualization of previously
unseen data is used to try and encourage viewers to modify their current
behavior—often for health or sustainability reasons. One example is Breakaway,34 a small custom-hardware desk
sculpture that moved into a slouching
pose to reflect the inactivity of a desk

www.computer.org/pervasive

­ ccupant. Once the worker took some
o
time away from the desk, the sculpture would return to an upright position. Another example is the Clouds
installation at the Open University. 21
It combined both conventional LCDs
and custom display hardware to encourage use of the stairs in preference
to the elevator. The installation of 24
display spheres (described earlier) was
complemented by an array of plasma
screens that gave a detailed representation of recent stair and elevator usage.
Although the potential for behaviorchange applications is clear, there remains a question as to the long-term
effectiveness of such interventions.
Therefore, the extent to which they will
become widely deployed is not obvious.
However, we do expect new applications for data visualization to develop
as new display technologies emerge.
Increased Difficulty in Managing
User Attention
Weiser’s original vision of calm computing (that is, interaction with digital
devices where the interaction is designed to occur in the user’s periphery
rather than at the center of attention)1
is often seen as being at odds with the
increasing trend toward displays embedded in the environment that compete for viewers’ attention. Research
has shown that modern viewers appear to look at pervasive displays for
very short periods of time (less than
two seconds), and many have become accustomed to ignoring them
altogether—a phenomenon known
as “display blindness.”35 To combat
this, display owners and content producers (in particular, advertisers) have
attempted to develop systems that are
ever more engaging in an attempt to
attract viewers’ attention. Such a battle for user attention seems a far cry
from the idea of displays fading into
the background as part of the fabric of
everyday life.
This difficulty in managing user attention arises in many areas of pervasive displays but is likely to be of

July–septemBer 2016

particular consequence when these
displays are being used for presenting complex information sets, which
often require significant time for the
user to assimilate and comprehend. In
situations where users actively seek out
displays and wish to engage with the
data being shown, this is not a problem. However, where data visualizations are being used for applications
such as ambient awareness or behavior change, this is likely to present a
serious challenge. We expect that this
problem will continue to grow until
common techniques for communicating levels of interest or expected viewing durations emerge.

I

nformation presentation through
pervasive displays has long been
an important focus for ubicomp.
Consumption of information (as
generated through social networks
and IoT, for example) is of growing
importance, and as we move towards
data- and information-rich societies,
the challenge of providing pervasive
information access without cognitive
overload is an increasingly significant
area of research.
Pervasive displays can help shape
interactions between users and growing pools of information, supporting
them in making complex inferences
and prompting a wealth of new opportunities. However, the choice
of display medium is an important
factor in determining the reach and
usability of information. Current
pervasive display research is often
segmented based on the technologies
involved: commercial products make
2D screens readily available, embedded technologies allow information
presentation in urban environments
through media facades, and novel
hardware allows tangible and bespoke representations of data. However, it is clear that these technologies
will exist as part of a comprehensive
display ecosystem in which users interact with information. As a result,

awareness of research across technology segments, together with an appreciation of common trends, is likely to
be of importance to a wide range of
research challenges going forward.

References
1. M. Weiser, “The Computer for the 21st
Century,” Scientific Am., Sept. 1991, pp.
94–104.
2. S. Houde, R. Bellamy, and L. Leahy, “In
Search of Design Principles for Tools
and Practices to Support Communication within a Learning Community,”
SIGCHI Bulletin, vol. 30, no. 2, 1998,
pp. 113–118.
3. J.E. Bardram, T.R. Hansen, and M.
Soegaard, “AwareMedia: A Shared Interactive Display Supporting Social, Temporal, and Spatial Awareness in Surgery,”
Proc. 2006 20th Anniversary Conf.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW), 2006, pp. 109–118.
4. C. Cruz-Neira, D.J. Sandin, and T.A.
DeFanti, “Surround-Screen ProjectionBased Virtual Reality: The Design and
Implementation of the CAVE,” Proc.
20th Ann. Conf. Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH),
1993, pp. 135–142.
5. M. Beaudouin-Lafon et al., “Multisurface
Interaction in the WILD Room,” Computer, vol. 45, no. 4, 2012, pp. 48–56.
6. P. Peltonen et al., “It’s Mine, Don’t
Touch!: Interactions at a Large MultiTouch Display in a City Centre,”
Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI), 2008,
pp. 1285–1294.
7. A. Friday, N. Davies, and C. Efstratiou,
“Reflections on Long-Term Experiments
with Public Displays,” Computer, vol. 45,
no. 5, 2012, pp. 34–41.
8. T. Heikkinen et al., “Lessons Learned
from the Deployment and Maintenance
of Ubi-Hotspots,” Proc. 4th Int’l Conf.
Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering (MUE), 2010; doi: 10.1109/
MUE.2010.5575054.
9. C. Hall, “Digital Signage Sends ‘Call of
the Wild’ at the Empire State Building,”
Digital Signage Today, 5 Aug. 2015;
www.digitalsignagetoday.com/articles/
digital-signage-sends-call-of-the-wild-atthe-empire-state-building.
10. S. Clinch et al., “Ownership and Trust
in Cyber-Foraged Displays,” Proc. Int’l

PER VA SI V E computing 21

Pervasive Displays

the Authors
Sarah Clinch is a post-doctoral researcher at Lancaster University, UK. Her research interests include pervasive displays and personalization in ubiquitous computing systems. Clinch received a PhD in computer science from Lancaster University. Contact her at s.clinch@lancaster.ac.uk.

Jason Alexander is a lecturer in HCI at Lancaster University, UK. His work addresses computing’s physical–digital divide by developing novel interaction techniques and devices. His recent research focuses on exploring shape-changing display technology. Alexander received a PhD in computer science from Canterbury
University, New Zealand. Contact him at j.alexander@lancaster.ac.uk.

Sven Gehring is a post-doctoral researcher at the German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI). His research interests include HCI in urban spaces as well
as interaction with media facades. Gehring received a PhD in computer science from
Saarland University, Germany. Contact him at sven.gehring@dfki.de.

Symp. Pervasive Displays (PerDis), 2014,
pp. 168–173.
11. H.M. Haeusler, Media Facades—History, Technology, Content, Avedition,
2009.
12. H.M. Haeusler, M. Tomitsch, and G.
Tscherteu, New Media Facades—A
Global Survey, Avedition, 2013.
13. J.D. Bolter, R. Grusin, and R.A. Grusin,
Remediation: Understanding New
Media, MIT Press, 2000.
14. G. Sade, “Aesthetics of Urban Media
Facades,” Proc. 2nd Media Architecture
Biennale Conf: World Cities (MAB),
2014, pp. 59–68.
15. P. Dalsgaard and K. Halskov, “Designing
Urban Media Facades: Cases and Challenges,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI),
2010, pp. 2277–2286.
16. S. Gehring et al., “The Media Facade
Toolkit: Prototyping and Simulating
Interaction with Media Facades,” Proc.
2013 ACM Int’l Joint Conf. Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp),
2013, pp. 763–772.
17. H. Korsgaard and M. Brynskov, “City
Bug Report: Urban Prototyping as Participatory Process and Practice,” Proc.
2nd Media Architecture Biennale Conf:
World Cities (MAB), 2014, pp. 21–29.

22

PER VA SI V E computing 

18. R. Klanten, S. Ehmann, and V. Hanschke,
A Touch of Code—Interactive Installations and Experiences, Gestalten, 2011.
19. M. Weiser and J.S. Brown, “Designing
Calm Technology,” PowerGrid J., vol. 1,
no. 1, 1996, pp. 75–85.
20. S. Antifakos and B. Schiele, “LaughingLily: Using a Flower as a Real World
Information Display,” Proc. 5th Int’l
Conf. Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp),
2003, pp. 161–162.
21. Y. Rogers et al., “Ambient Influence:
Can Twinkly Lights Lure and Abstract
Representations Trigger Behavioral
Change?” Proc. 12th ACM Int’l Conf.
Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp),
2010, pp. 261–270.

25. F. Taher et al., “Exploring Interactions
with Physically Dynamic Bar Charts,”
Proc. 33rd Ann. ACM Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 2015,
pp. 3237–3246.
26. A. Roudaut et al., “Morphees: Toward
High ‘Shape Resolution’ in Self-actuated
Flexible Mobile Devices,” Proc. SIGCHI
Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 2013, pp. 593–602.
27. Y. Jansen et al., “Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization,” Proc. 33rd
Ann. ACM Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 2015, pp. 3227–3236.
28. J. Hardy et al., “ShapeClip: Towards
Rapid Prototyping with Shape-Changing
Displays for Designers,” Proc. 33rd Ann.
ACM Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 2015, pp. 19–28.
29. D. Leithinger et al., “Sublimate: StateChanging Virtual and Physical Rendering to Augment Interaction with Shape
Displays,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI),
2013, pp. 1441–1450.
30. T. Omirou et al., “LeviPath: Modular
Acoustic Levitation for 3D Path Visualisations,” Proc. 33rd Ann. ACM Conf.
Human Factors in Computing System
(CHI), 2015, pp. 309–312.
31. A. Colley, J. Rantakari, and J. Häkk i l ä , “Aug ment i ng t he Home to
Remember: Initial User Perceptions,”
Proc . 2014 AC M Int ’l Joint Conf.
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct Publication (UbiComp),
2014, pp. 1369–1372.
32. R. José et al., “Instant Places: Using Bluetooth for Situated Interaction in Public
Displays,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
vol. 7, no. 4, 2008, pp. 52–57.
33. S. Clinch, “Smartphones and Pervasive
Public Displays,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 12, no. 1, 2013, pp. 92–95.

22. S. Claes and A.V. Moere, “The Role of
Tangible Interaction in Exploring Information on Public Visualization Displays,”
Proc. 4th Int’l Symp. Pervasive Displays
(PerDis), 2015, pp. 201–207.

34. N. Jafarinaimi et al., “Breakaway: An
Ambient Display Designed to Change
Human Behavior,” Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI), 2005, pp. 1945–1948.

23. S. Follmer et al., “inFORM: Dynamic
Physical Affordances and Constraints
through Shape and Object Actuation,”
Proc. 26th Ann. ACM Symp. User Interface Software and Technology (UIST),
2013, pp. 417–426.

35. N. Memarovic, S. Clinch, and F. Alt,
“Understanding Display Blindness in
Future Display Deployments,” Proc. 4th
Int’l Symp. Pervasive Displays (PerDis),
2015, pp. 7– 14.

24. I. Sutherland, “The Ultimate Display,”
Proc. Int’l Federation of Information
Processing (IFIP) Congress, vol. 65, no.
2, 1965, pp. 506–508.

Selected CS articles and columns
are also available for free at
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.

www.computer.org/pervasive

