202

The use of solid physical models for the study of
macromolecular assembly
Michael J Bailey*, Klaus Schulten† and John E Johnson‡
The use of modern technology in the construction of accurate
solid macromolecular models based on atomic coordinates
and electron density functions has led us to re-examine the
usefulness of physical models as tools for understanding
molecular assembly and for designing detailed experimental
and computational studies of the assembly process. Recent
developments include the construction of new models, which
have provided insights into the assembly of viruses and light
harvesting complexes.
Addresses
*San Diego Supercomputer Center and Department of Applied
Mechanics and Engineering Sciences, University of California at San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
†Beckman Institute, University of Illinois, 405 North Mathew Street,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
‡Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA;
e-mail: jackj@scripps.edu
Correspondence: John E Johnson
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1998, 8:202–208
http://biomednet.com/elecref/0959440X00800202
© Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0959-440X
Abbreviations
BBV
black beetle virus
LH
light harvesting
LOM
laminated object manufacturing
RP
rapid prototyping
SFF
solid freeform fabrication
STL
stereo lithography

Introduction
This ‘opinion’ does not fit the form of most of the contributions to this volume in that it does not review and
assess an area of macromolecular assembly with a significant current history. It is more of an ‘opinion’ in the traditional definition of the word — in that the authors have
had experience with a new approach for constructing
physical models of macromolecules and seek to demonstrate how these models have provided significant new
insights into understanding the assembly of the protein
molecules that form virus particles [1–5] and light harvesting complexes [6–8]. We use this review as an opportunity to provide a brief ‘ancient’ history of the
development of physical models based on electron density functions and atomic coordinates, and to describe the
sophisticated technology used to construct current models. We then relate our experiences with the technology
mentioned above and attempt to demonstrate the fact
that modern physical models are important tools that significantly extend the understanding of protein assembly
available from modern three-dimensional computergraphical analysis.

Three-dimensional models
Humans adapt well to the three-dimensional world of
every day existence and three-dimensional objects and
constructions are taken for granted. Most of us, however,
have significant problems in visualizing three-dimensional
features of virtual objects such as mathematical functions.
Three-dimensional imaging of various density functions
was particularly problematic until the advent of modern
computer graphics. This has revolutionized our ability to
visualize and understand three-dimensional images ranging from X-ray and magnetic resonance tomographs in
medicine, to electron density functions derived from X-ray
crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy. Prior to the
development of modern graphics visualization, crystallographers were remarkably successful in representing density functions and the derived models in creative ways with
physical models. Plotting electron density as contours on
transparent plastic sheets that are then stacked to generate
the third dimension has been, and still is, a highly effective
way of visualizing the three-dimensional electron density
function. This representation is still of value when requiring a global impression of electron density that is difficult
to represent in a graphics system.
Constructing three-dimensional models from electron
density is exceptionally problematic. A popular and effective approach of representing the surface of the molecule
is the balsawood model. Construction of these models is
based on contoured maps stacked on transparent Plexiglas.
A contour was chosen that represents the surface and then
on each section of the density a slice of balsawood that corresponded to that contour level was cut. These slices were
then glued together and the composite is an accurate representation of the molecular surface. The most widely
used device for constructing atomic skeleton models is the
Richard’s box [9]. This device allows the model to be constructed from scale atomic model parts that are fitted into
the density through the use of proper lighting and a halfsilvered mirror that reflects the model into the density.
This allows accurate fitting of the model parts directly to
the density, with only slight distortions due to parallax.
From the coordinates of such models it is possible to create other representations of the model. One of the most
popular is the wire protein model, which is made using the
phi psi angles derived from the coordinates of the backbone α-carbon atoms and implements a special device
invented by Byron Rubin for bending the wire.
Simplified or reduced physical models of protein assemblies have long been important in illustrating the underlying features of such associations. Probably the most
creative model maker in the area of virus assembly is
Don Caspar. In order to visualize the concepts of quasi

Solid physical models for the study of macromolecular assembly Bailey, Schulten and Johnson

equivalence, Caspar and Klug started with paper models
of icosadeltahedra [10], but then progressed to more
sophisticated mechanical models that beautifully illustrate the bonding flexibility required by subunits in order
to accommodate the variations in environment that occur
during quasi-equivalent virus assembly [11].

203

Figure 1

(a)

Modern model fabrication
Modern computer technology has made the need for physical models less essential in the interpretation of threedimensional structural results. It has also allowed the
development of very sophisticated physical models that
have provided new levels of appreciation for the complimentarity of surfaces in protein assembly and have also
revealed details of protein interactions that were not fully
appreciated from the computer graphics representation.
One of these technologies is based on a device developed
for the production of prototype machine parts and has
been adapted for making molecular models. The instrument produces models (in a nearly automated fashion) that
are comparable to the balsawood models, but are physically robust and amenable for the study of protein associations. The input information that has been used are the
coordinates of atoms of either individual subunits (light
harvesting complexes and virus capsids) or a sub-assembly
fragment composed of three subunits (for virus capsids).
The coordinate information is converted into a list of strictly contiguous surface triangles that are used to direct the
machining process. The effective resolution of the models
is based on the number of triangles derived from the coordinates and, in the examples discussed below, corresponds
to about 1 Å resolution. Three-dimensional models based
directly on electron density would require only minor
modifications compared to the procedures based on coordinates.
The principal procedure for model construction is a technology known as either rapid prototyping (RP), or solid
freeform fabrication (SFF). Many technologies are used to
produce these models [12–14] but regardless of the specific technology, SFF processes are all characterized by additive manufacturing methods instead of the subtractive
methods as found in traditional numerical control machining. The process used at the San Diego Supercomputer
Center for making solid molecular models is known as laminated object manufacturing (LOM) and is shown in
Figure 1. In the LOM process, a roll of paper, available in
various thickness from 0.0038 inches to 0.0100 inches, is
fed a section at a time into a work area. The paper has a
thin layer of glue on the underside. A hot roller (400°F)
and high pressure laminate the new sheet of paper to the
previous layers. A laser then cuts the outer and inner outlines of this layer as would be done in constructing a balsawood model. A series of mirrors directs the laser beam
through a lens tube that is moved in x and y directions by
a standard pen plotter mechanism. The power provided to
the laser is carefully calibrated to slice through one and
only one sheet of paper. After the laser finishes outlining

Laser

(b)

Heater

Layers
already
completed
Take up spool

Supply spool

(c)

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

The tele-manufacturing process. (a) The network organization for using
the tele-manufacturing facility in an interactive mode through the World
Wide Web. (b) A schematic representation of the laminated object
manufacturing (LOM) process. (c) A photograph of the instrument that
actually manufactures the models.

the outer and inner contours of the model, it crosshatches
the portions of the layer area that are not included in the
two-dimensional cross section. Later on, these crosshatch
cubes are removed as scrap. The process repeats for all layers until completed. The resulting model looks, feels, and
acts like it is made of wood. Once a LOM model has been
finished, the scrap must be removed by hand. For some
models this falls right off and for some it must be dug out
with dentistry-type tools.
Additive manufacturing process have some definite advantages when fabricating three-dimensional parts for molecular

Macromolecular assemblages

Two examples of the use of this technology for improving
our understanding of macromolecular assembly illustrate
its usefulness.

Virus assembly
Nodaviruses are simple nonenveloped RNA viruses with
capsids formed from a single gene product [1]. The virus
particle contains 180 subunits arranged with T = 3 quasisymmetry and form a polyhedron with a rhombic triacontahedron shape (Figure 2). The structures of three
members of this family have been solved at near atomic
resolution [5,15,16]. Black beetle virus (BBV) was chosen
for study by LOM models. The icosahedral asymmetric
unit corresponding to the ABC trimer shown in Figure 2
was initially constructed as a single unit (Figure 3a). Then
three identical models of the A subunit were made. After
some effort it was possible to assemble the three A subunits in an identical trimer corresponding to the threefold
symmetric version of the ABC quasi-trimer in Figures 2
and 3a. The ABC trimer assembly demonstrated an extraordinary degree of surface complimentarity not previously

Figure 2

(a)

(b)

A5

C5

A
C

B2

C
Arm

Arm

dsRNA

B2

C2

modeling. The parts can have almost arbitrary geometric
complexity and the fabrication can be set up and proceed
with little or no human preparation. The former is especially advantageous for making models of molecules. One of
the problems with subtractive manufacturing methods is
that whatever implement is doing the subtracting needs
access in order to remove material. For some models, the
complexity of the geometry prohibits the cutting tool getting as far in as it needs to go, or at least makes it difficult.
Molecules are the ultimate example of this. Their deep
channels and grooves make it almost impossible to get a
machine tool into all the crevices without accidentally
gouging some portion of the model that we mean to keep.
The latter point is also significant. Models of molecules
have both a top and a bottom that require fabrication. For
typical subtractive methods, such models would need to be
machined on the top and then flipped over to machine the
rest. In order to flip the model over correctly, a set of fixtures and clamps would have to be designed and a process
would have to be put in place to register the model once it
has been flipped and clamped. This ensures that the model
is indeed where the machine tool thinks it is. If this is not
done, then the features on the top half will not align with
the features on the bottom half. The point is that fabrication methods for molecular model making must not require
much manufacturing knowledge, or they will not be used.
To this end, the tele-manufacturing project is using the
World Wide Web as an interface to the SFF process. As
shown in Figure 1a, users can submit their geometry stereo
lithography (STL) files from their favorite browser, have
those files automatically checked for geometric and topological consistency, have a corrected STL file returned, or
have the file queued for fabrication. When the model is
being fabricated, the web page can also be used to get feedback on the manufacturing process, including seeing video
images from cameras surrounding the machine.

B
5

204

dsRNA

(c)

A2
B5

C

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

Schematic and physical representations of the black beetle virus. (a) A
schematic representation of the nodavirus capsid as a rhombic
triacontahedron. Each trapezoid represents a protein subunit
comprising 407 amino acids. The location of duplex RNA and the
polypeptide arm (residues 20–31 of the C subunit) are shown in the
diagram. One icosahedral asymmetric unit is defined by the central
isosceles triangle with a fivefold axis (small pentagon) at the top and
threefold axes (small triangle) left and right. The labels A, B, and C
represent the three subunits in each of the 60 icosahedral asymmetric
units in the T = 3 particle. Although they are identical gene products,
the subunits are not related by strict symmetry and they are structurally
slightly different. Note that the A subunits cluster around the fivefold
symmetry axes of the icosahedron and the B and C subunits alternate
about the icosahedral threefold axes to form the quasi-sixfold axes. All
subunits labeled with a letter followed by a number are related to A, B
or C by an icosahedral symmetry operator indicated by the number
(e.g. A5 is related to A by an icosahedral fivefold symmetry operation).
Quasi-symmetry axes relate subunits only locally to a quasi-symmetry
axis (e.g. the quasi-threefold axis in the central triangle relates A, B and
C with a high fidelity, but at a greater distance from the axis than it
relates a fivefold axis to a quasi-sixfold axis). Each asymmetric unit has
three neighboring asymmetric units. The central triangle has
asymmetric units on its left and right related to it by fivefold symmetry
and the third at the bottom related to it by twofold symmetry. Note that
the joints (junctions between subunits) are not strictly equivalent (they
are related by quasi-threefold symmetry) although the same surfaces of
the protein subunits interact (e.g. the C–C2 contact has the same
protein surfaces juxtaposed as the A–B5 contact). (b,c) Sideviews of
the joints between asymmetric units. (b) The joint at the bottom of the
central triangle viewed along the line connecting the two threefold
symmetry axes. The dihedral angle between these two triangular
surfaces is 180° (i.e. they are coplanar). (c) The joint at the left of the
central triangle viewed along the line connecting a fivefold axis to a
threefold axis. The dihedral angle between these two triangular
surfaces in this polyhedron is 144°. For proper assembly to occur, the
trimer interfaces must be able to hinge with a molecular switch
determining the dihedral angle between asymmetric units. In the
nodaviruses, the switch is a 10 base pair RNA duplex and a 12 amino
acid polypeptide (residues 20–31) that are only ordered in the C
subunits. These form a wedge that prevents the bending of the joint at
the bottom of the central triangle.

appreciated from graphical studies or obvious from its construction as a single unit. This threefold symmetric ‘artificial’ assembly was interesting because the quasi threefold
axes relate fivefold axes to sixfold axes and do not form the

Solid physical models for the study of macromolecular assembly Bailey, Schulten and Johnson

205

Figure 3

Subunit interactions of black beetle virus (BBV). (a) A view from the exterior, down the quasi-threefold symmetry axis, of the solid LOM trimer
model, constructed as a single unit with the coordinates from the A, B and C subunits of BBV. This corresponds to a single icosahedral asymmetric
unit, and 60 of these units, related by icosahedral symmetry, form the BBV particle. (b) A view into the side of an AB interface (roughly along a line
connecting the quasi-twofold axis on the bent joint to the quasi-threefold axis in the center of the triangle) formed by two identical A subunits
related by threefold symmetry. The interface surface has been spread open by inserting a coin into the contact to clearly show the two juxtaposed
surfaces. (c) The same view with the coin removed, showing the cavity formed by the two surfaces. (d) A view corresponding roughly to (a)
showing the juxtaposition of two trimer LOM models forming a ‘bent’ contact. (e) The same view with the two trimers separated showing the ‘peg
into hole’ alignment that guides the assembly of this interface. Given that the hole is formed by the interface of two subunits in the trimer, shown in
(b) and (c), it is likely that the particles assemble from preformed trimers. Note that prior to assembly, the same interface is exposed to the twofold
related ‘flat’ joint; however, duplex RNA and residues 20–31 of the C subunits are ordered in this interface and interrupt the ‘peg into hole
interaction’ leading to the ‘flat’ contact. Indeed, residues 20–31 cover the ‘peg’ and part of this polypeptide inserts into the hole formed by the
B2–C2 interface, mimicking the peptide ‘peg’ that inserts into the hole at the ‘bent’ joint.

206

Macromolecular assemblages

exact threefold symmetric association seen in the particle
from which the coordinates were derived. Note that two of
the subunits (B and C) are associated with quasi sixfold
axes whereas the third (A) is associated with the fivefold
axes. This illustrates the fact that identical subunits are
sufficiently similar to the quasi-equivalent subunits for an
exact threefold association to be made and that there are
no significant differences between threefold related AA
interfaces and quasi-threefold related AB, BC, and CA
interfaces. This is probably relevant to the assembly
process because we hypothesize that the first fragment in
assembly is an ABC trimer with exact threefold symmetry
and that the observed asymmetry about the quasi-threefold axis in the assembled particle is induced during the
assembly process.
After the threefold symmetric particle was made, it was
noticed that a remarkable cavity was located on the surface
of the trimer distal to the threefold axis (Figure 3b,c). This
surface forms the fivefold and twofold associations of
trimers (Figure 2). The cavities are formed by interfaces
between threefold related subunits (i.e. AB, BC and CA),
thus their formation depends on the assembly of the trimer.
There is a perfectly complimentary protrusion on the surface of the B5 subunit (the subunit related by a fivefold
clockwise rotation to the B subunit in Figure 2) that fits into
the cavity formed by the CA interface upon assembly of
fivefold related trimers (Figure 3d,e), suggesting that this
assembly is guided by a ‘peg into hole mechanism’.
Although the structure had been refined at 2.8 Å resolution
and the subunit interfaces studied extensively with both
computer graphics and atomic distance analysis, this
remarkable complimentarity had not been appreciated.
Indeed, in the BBV refinement paper [3], the interaction of
the cavity was included in a figure, but its full significance
had escaped notice until the solid models were made.
Additional insight was gained from the assembly of the
trimeric models that were constructed as a single unit
(Figure 3d). It was clear that the trimeric units related by
fivefold symmetry (A–B5 contact in Figure 2) could be
directly assembled as rigid bodies and form an extraordinarily complementary interface (Figure 3d,e). In contrast,
when the C–C2 association was attempted, the units could
not be directly joined to form a continuous surface. This
indicates that the assembly of the C–C2 interface can not
be approximated as a simple rigid-body association of
assembling units, but that there are significant alterations
that occur at this interface during the assembly process.
The solid models led to further insights when the A–B5
interface was compared in detail with the C–C2 interface.
Previous work showed that a 12 amino acid polypeptide
(residues 20–31 of the C subunit) and 10 base pairs of an
RNA duplex are ordered at the C–C2 interface and are not
ordered at the A–B5 interface [5]. This results in a dramatic difference in the dihedral angle at the two interfaces,
with the A–B5 joint bent (144° dihedral angle) and the
C–C2 joint flat (180° dihedral angle). The solid model

shows that the ordered peptide directly interacts with the
protrusion that inserts into the cavity at the A–B5 interface
and thus dramatically changes the interfacial interactions
even though the same portion of the subunits are juxtaposed at the two interfaces. A portion of the ordered
polypeptide actually partially interacts with the cavity at
this interface, thus participating in a level of molecular
mimicry that leads to quasi-equivalence.

Assembly of light harvesting complexes
Light harvesting (LH) complexes, as shown in Figure 4
establish a scaffold that organizes a hierarchy of circular
complexes of 300 chlorophylls and 200 carotenoids within
the photosynthetic membranes of purple bacteria [8].
Organized into the form of a ring-shaped protein, LH-I, the
largest light harvesting complex, surrounds a central protein
complex called the reaction center. The complex of LH-I
with the reaction center is in turn surrounded by about 10
smaller proteins, called LH-II, which are also ring shaped.
The entire system, the photosynthetic unit, absorbs sunlight, efficiently transfers the excitation energy within a few
picoseconds from the periphery to the reaction center and
converts the energy into a membrane potential.
The remarkable overall architecture of the photosynthetic
unit is matched by the equally remarkable architecture of
the individual LH-I and LH-II complexes. LH-II of
Rhodospirillum molischianum is composed of 16 independent
peptides (eight identical α subunits and eight identical β
subunits), 24 chlorophylls and eight carotenoids [7]. These
components self-aggregate within the cytoplasmic membrane, most probably into heterodimers first, each made of
an α apoprotein, a β apoprotein, three chlorophylls and a
carotenoid, and then using the heterodimers as building
blocks for assembly into a ring of eight heterodimers. In the
case of LH-II from both Rhodopseudomonas acidophila [8]
and Rhodobacter sphaeroides [6], nine heterodimers aggregate
into the LH-II complex. The LH-I complex consists of sixteen heterodimers that each contain, however, two chlorophylls and one carotenoid.
In order to understand how the self-aggregation of the
individual LH-I and LH-II complexes and the whole photosynthetic unit is achieved from its main building blocks,
the αβ heterodimers, we resorted to LOM models. We
thought of several questions regarding the self-aggregation process to investigate with such models. How do
geometry and energetics contribute to the aggregation of
a single pair of heterodimers? How is this aggregation
guided within the cell membrane? How do the single heterodimer building blocks control the overall ring size?
How do changes of ring size affect the stability of an overall complex? These questions might be pursued through
modeling calculations, but due to the large size of the
overall ring systems and the qualitative nature of the phenomenon of self-aggregation, that is, one does not know a
priori which observables to monitor, an approach through
LOM models appeared more promising and certainly

Solid physical models for the study of macromolecular assembly Bailey, Schulten and Johnson

Figure 4

207

surfaces by inspection of single surfaces, leading to an
overemphasis of a few readily recognizable binding hot
spots as an explanation for adhesion between proteins.
Once the LOM models of (initially) nine heterodimers had
been manufactured, we decided to paint the models as
shown in Figure 4. The colors helped us greatly in both the
use of the models and the interpretation of our ‘hands on’
experiments. The first such experiment, the assembly of
LH-II from eight heterodimer units was possibly the most
revealing. It turned out that the aggregation of the building blocks did not require any flexibility of the dimer surfaces; the individual components naturally fit together
tightly without the need for a flexible adjustment of their
surfaces. This feature implies a favorable entropy of aggregation, that is the heterodimers do not need to explore
much conformational space in order to interlock.
The resulting complex strikes the observer with the realization that the heterodimers have purposefully evolved
corrugated self-complementary surfaces in order to both
steer the aggregation process and to stabilize the eventual
aggregates. Any coarse graining of atomic level surface features of LOM models deteriorates adhesion between heterodimers. In fact, the LOM models require about 30,000
triangles for the proper representation of the surface features of each heterodimer. This corresponds to below
angstrom resolution and proved necessary in order to properly represent the relevant complementarity of surfaces.

Molecular graphics and laminated object manufacturing (LOM)
representations of light harvesting (LH) complexes. (a) LH complexes I
(LH-I, left) and II (LH-II, right), with LH-I surrounding the (barely visible)
reaction center. The protein complexes are presented schematically as
cylinders (α helices), tubes (coils), green squares (chlorophylls) and
yellow liquorice (carotenoids). The (inner ring) α subunits are in blue, the
(outer ring) β subunits are in magenta. The figure illustrates how LH-I and
LH-II act as a scaffold that holds rings of chlorophylls in place as well as
carotenoids. Chlorophylls and carotenoids absorb sunlight and transfer its
energy to the reaction center. (b) LOM models of an individual
heterodimer (bottom), LH-II (left), LH-I (middle) and a reaction center
(right). The LH-I and LH-II models were colored as follows: α apoproteins,
blue; β apoproteins, red; chlorophylls, green; carotenoids, yellow. The LHII shown (left) is an aggregate of eight heterodimers like the one shown at
the bottom; LH-I (middle) is an aggregate of sixteen heterodimers. The
reaction center has been colored brown, light blue and dark blue
according to its three protein subunits; ubiquinones are colored white.
The LOM model of the reaction center (right) fits tightly but comfortably
inside the LOM model of the LH-I ring (middle). (c) The fully assembled
model of the LH complex.

faster than simulations. It is also notoriously difficult to
recognize complementary features between binding

The heterodimers are composed of two, rather short, transmembrane helices, a feature that requires the heterodimers to be oriented strictly normal to the membrane
plane; a tilt would immerse the polar side groups into the
hydrophobic phase of the lipid bilayer. A pronounced top
to bottom asymmetry of the heterodimer favors a vectorial
orientation in the membrane. Manipulation of two heterodimer models that are properly juxtaposed and rotated
relative to each other readily reveals the proper interlocking geometry of a heterodimer pair. A similar one-dimensional (rotation around the membrane normal) search
process is likely to govern the rapid self-assembly of LHII within the cytoplasmic membrane.
One can readily build rings of slightly ‘wrong’ sizes, for
example, an LH-II ring of only seven units or of nine units,
that is, one too few or one too many. In both cases the
LOM models reveal a loose packing with wobbling heterodimer units. This is certainly a feature that results from
the fact that the heterodimer LOM models stem from an
eight ring structure, that is, a structure optimized for that
particular ring size. The model demonstrates clearly, however, that the complementarity and orientation of the corrugated surfaces of the individual heterodimers are precise
enough to control the overall ring size at eight units.
The models revealed some altogether unexpected features.
It was known that LH-II in vivo actually binds sixteen

208

Macromolecular assemblages

carotenoids, rather than only eight as seen in the crystal
structure. During the crystallization procedure half of the
carotenoids, that is, one carotenoid per heterodimer, stray
away. Inspection of the model revealed a channel between
heterodimer surfaces into which one can fit the missing
carotenoid. This feature, that is, a deviation from perfect
complementarity, was not detected by means of molecular
graphics, even though we had searched extensively for possible binding sites for the additional carotenoids.
We have also built the LH-I complex from sixteen LOM
models of the respective heterodimers, and a LOM model
of the reaction center. This allowed us to build a key section of the photosynthetic unit [6]. The LOM models
revealed that one can readily clap the LH-I ring over the
reaction center leading to the unique geometry of the complex. In this complex, LH-I forms an atrium-type space
adjacent to the reaction center surface with the entrance of
a functionally important quinone-binding site. One also
notices that the sixteen unit LH-I ring is considerably more
flexible in its shape than is the eight unit LH-II ring; it does
not appear likely that the LH-I ring would assume its proper size and shape without the reaction center template.

Conclusions
The use of modern technology in the construction of
highly accurate solid macromolecular models based on
atomic coordinates and electron density functions has led
us to re-examine the usefulness of physical models as
tools for understanding molecular assembly and for
designing detailed experimental and computational studies of the assembly process. The solid models have sensitized us to the complimentary surface features of protein
subunits and their interactions. By physically assembling
the models we have refined our perspectives on assembly.
We now see that assembly of the nodavirus particle is
guided by ‘peg into hole’ interface alignments that can
occur only after the trimer subassembly product has
formed and that the size and stability of LH complexes
are as a result of highly structured corrugated associations
between subunits. These observations strongly suggest
that assembly pathways are dictated by associations determined by large-scale surface complimentarity and that
these are only supplemented by the favorable local interactions that had previously dominated our attention in
both of these structures. With these observations in mind,
we are pursuing qualitatively more informed computational studies of LH in order to determine the nature of
the
adhesion
forces
governing
self-assembly.
Experimental studies of nodaviruses are currently underway that are designed to identify drugs that interfere with
assembly, or actually disassemble virus particles by binding with high affinity into the ‘alignment holes’ at the subunit interfaces. Similar efforts will attempt to confound
the molecular mimicry that is essential for quasi-equivalent assembly. Finally, we are computationally examining
the associations within other known virus structures to see
if the assembly principles identified for nodaviruses are

more widely applicable and if they will lead to viable targets for the design of antiviral agents.

Acknowledgements
The tele-manufacturing of laminated object models is supported by a
National Science Foundation grant, MIP-9420099 (to MJB). Studies of
nodaviruses are supported by a National Institutes of Health grant
GM34220 (to JEJ) and the studies of the light harvesting protein complexes
are supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH grant
P41RR05969), the National Science Foundation (NSF grant BIR 9318159
and NSF grant BIR9423827) as well as by the Carver Charitable Trust (to
KS). Dru Clark (San Diego Supercomputer Center) is gratefully
acknowledged for his role in the tele-manufacturing of the physical models
and we thank Vijay Reddy for his help in preparing Figures 2 and 3.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review,
have been highlighted as:

• of special interest
•• of outstanding interest
1.

Johnson J, Reddy V: Structural studies of noda and tetraviruses. In
The Insect Viruses. Edited by Miller L, Ball L. New York: Plenum;
1998: in press.

2.

Reddy V, Giesing H, Morton R, Kumar A, Post C, Brooks C, Johnson J:
Energetics of quasi-equivalence: computational analysis of
protein-protein interactions in icosahedral viruses. Biophys J
1998, 74:546-558.

3.

Wery J, Reddy V, Hosur M, Johnson J: The refined structure of an
insect virus at 2.8 Å resolution. J Mol Biol 1994, 235:565-586.

4.

Cheng R, Reddy V, Olson N, Fisher A, Baker T, Johnson J: Functional
implications of quasi-equivalence in a T=3 icosahedral animal
virus established by cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray
crystallography. Structure 1994, 2:271-282.

5.

Fisher A, Johnson J: Ordered duplex RNA controls capsid
architecture in an icosahedral animal virus. Nature 1993, 361:176179.

6.

Hu X, Damjanovic A, Ritz T, Schulten K: Architecture and function of
the light harvesting apparatus of purple bacteria. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1998, in press.

7.

Koepke J, Hu X, Muenke C, Schulten K, Michel H: The crystal
structure of the light harvesting complex II (B800-850) from
Rhodospirillum molischianum. Structure 1996, 4:581-597.

8.

McDermott G, Prince S, Freer A, Hawthornthwaite-Lawless A, Papiz
M, Cogdell R, Isaacs N: Crystal structure of an integral membrane
light-harvesting complex from photosynthetic bacteria. Nature
1994, 367:614-621.

9.

Richards F: The matching of physical models to three dimensional
electron density maps: a simple optical device. J Mol Biol 1968,
37:225-230.

10. Caspar D, Klug A: Physical principals in the construction of regular
viruses. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1962, 27:1-24.
11. Caspar D: Movement and self control in protein assemblies:quasiequivalence revisited. Biophys J 1980, 32:103-135.
12. Bailey M: The use of solid rapid prototyping in computer graphics
and scientific visualization. In SIGGRAPH Course Notes for The
Use of Touch as an I/O Device for Graphics and Visualization. Edited
by Spencer S. New York: ACM Press; 1996.
13. Burns M: Automated Fabrication. Engelwood Cliffs, New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall; 1993.
14. Johnson J: Unified Description of All Free Form Fabrication
Technologies Based on Fundamental Principles. Irvine, California:
Palatino Press; 1994.
15. Hosur M, Schmidt T, Tucker R, Johnson J, Gallagher T, Selling B,
Rueckert R: Structure of an insect virus at 3.0 Å resolution.
Proteins 1987, 2:167-176.
16. Zlotnick A, Natarajan P, Munshi S, Johnson J: Resolution of space
group ambiguity and the structure determination of nodamura
virus to 3.3 Å resolution from pseudo R32 (monoclinic) crystals.
Acta Crystallogr 1997, 53:738-746.

