AI & Soc
DOI 10.1007/s00146-017-0752-1

OPEN FORUM

‘‘It’s like holding a human heart’’: the design of Vital + Morph,
a shape-changing interface for remote monitoring
Alberto Boem1 • Hiroo Iwata2

Received: 9 July 2017 / Accepted: 21 July 2017
 Springer-Verlag London Ltd. 2017

Abstract Based on the concept of data physicalization, we
developed Vital ? Morph, an interactive surface for
remote connection and awareness of clinical data. It
enables users located in remote places to monitor and feel
the vital signs measured from a hospitalized person through
shape-change. We propose shape-changing interfaces as a
way of making data physicalization a richer, intriguing and
memorable experience that communicates complex information and insights about data. To demonstrate and validate our proposed concept, we developed an exploratory
study about the design and its implications. For evaluating
the social impact of shape-changing interfaces in the context of remote monitoring, we presented Vital ? Morph in
several Media Art festivals. We collected and analyzed the
feedback from the visitors during the exhibitions, and
discussed the possibilities of the proposed system. A preliminary evaluation shows how shape-changing displays
are perceived by users, which establishes not only the
potential benefits but also highlights the concerns that
several users have raised. Through this study, we aim to
contribute to the design of remote monitoring systems by
providing a novel approach for displaying clinical data that
consider the richness of the physical world. In today’s
information-driven society, we should not just focus on

& Alberto Boem
alberto@vrlab.esys.tsukuba.ac.jp
Hiroo Iwata
iwata@kz.tsukuba.ac.jp
1

Empowerment Informatics, School of Integrative and Global
Majors, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba
305-8573, Japan

2

Faculty of Engineering, Information and Systems, University
of Tsukuba, Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305-8573, Japan

how abstract data are collected and analyzed, but also on
how it can be presented and incorporated into our daily
lives.
Keywords Shape-changing interfaces  Remote
monitoring  Information technologies  Haptics 
Vital signs

1 Introduction
Remote monitoring can be regarded as a subdivision of
telemedicine that involves the use of audio, video,
telecommunication and information processing techniques
to remotely monitor patient status. Usually, the data collected are displayed on screens and monitors. However, the
commonly used numerical and waveform visualization
techniques and pixel-based displays are unable to adequately depict the embodiment of data and to intuitively
represent data in forms easy for our consumption and
comprehension (Van de Moere 2008).
Data collection and analysis is usually perceived to be
within the exclusive domain of scientific enquiry. The most
common image that comes to our mind whenever data are
mentioned is a series of numbers presented in a spreadsheet.
However, because of the widespread use of embedded sensor
networks and mobile systems, data have penetrated our
everyday lives, which has raised a new set of questions. Most
of these questions pertain to the integration and engagement
of data. Many questions are also related to the methods used
for displaying data and making it comprehensible to humans.
This is done by the visual representation of data present in the
form of a sheet filled with numbers as histograms or charts.
We can notice that in the common discourse there is a tendency to talk about data in a general and abstract manner.

123

AI & Soc
Fig. 1 A complete view of
Vital ? Morph and its main
components: a the
Vital ? Morph interface,
composed of (1) the Vitals, and
(2) Morph; b a software that
simulates the functions of a vital
signs monitoring station;
c another morph that can be
placed at a different place from
a and can communicate with it

This attitude reveals a belief that data can be disembodied
from its source. However, data are not neutral; it can actually
help people take appropriate action. In the healthcare
domain, the expert who can analyze and interpret a patient’s
data has become extremely critical. In addition, medical
device firms often make it very difficult for patients to access
their own data (Iaconesi and Persico 2016). However, we are
witnessing the emergence of a tendency that Nafus (2016)
calls the domestication of data, which can be defined as the
process of consumption and adoption of data using widely
available technologies such as personal computers or mobile
phones. Though, in the past, even these technologies were
originally designed for very specific applications, they have
quickly proliferated once people started adopting them in
their everyday lives. The concept of domestication of data
does not refer to a process of making people ‘data scientists’.
On the contrary, it concentrates on emerging and possible
ways of using, sharing, and engaging with abstract data,
which also include clinical data. To become a part of our
everyday experience and environment, data will need to be
transformed from an abstract entity to an explicit and tangible material entity. Here, tangible does not necessarily
mean that abstract data can be touched or grasped; it just
implies the presence of data in the physical world to help
people relate to its existence (Ishii and Ullmer 1997).
Even though digital and information technologies have
commonly been described as ‘immaterial’, in recent years,
there has been a resurgence in the interest in exploring the
material qualities of abstract data. Driven by the increasing
prevalence of Internet of Things (IoT), this discussion has
been taken up in fields such as Media Art and human–computer interaction (HCI). The notion of neomateriality (Paul
2015) captures such emerging forms of reality wherein digitally augmented objects and appliances transform everything
into information. Materials that are shaped by information
objects mirror a reality composed of embedded processes and
data. Recently, in HCI, the practice of data physicalization
(Jansen et al. 2015) has been introduced as a novel paradigm
for making abstract data perceptible to humans by encoding it
into the physical qualities of materials. In contrast to common

123

approaches like data visualization and data sonification,
physicalization has the potential to open new ways of physically engaging people with information (Willett et al. 2017).
The emergent area of research on shape-changing interfaces is
directly related to such issues. The goal of shape-changing
interfaces is to represent the continuous change in the flow of
digital information using novel materials that can depict data
based on its physical qualities.
In this study, we introduce the development and evaluation
of Vital ? Morph (Fig. 1), a shape-changing interface used
for remote monitoring through data physicalization.
Vital ? Morph is composed of a series of reactive materials
that can physically represent the vital signs of a patient located
remotely in real time, for the benefit of his/her parents and
friends. Through this research, we aim to explore how the
engagement and awareness of physiological measurements of
a remote patient can be improved through dynamic physicalization and shape-change. We will test our system for a
specific case based on a fictional scenario of remote monitoring, involving a patient hospitalized in the Intensive Care
Unit (ICU). The patient’s vital signs are physicalized at a
remote location using the Vital ? Morph technique. Through
this study, we will review the conceptual spectrum of representing abstract information in a physical manner and relate it
to the emerging field of shape-changing displays. The design
metaphors, technical implementation, and system evaluation
will be described in detail. To assess and prove the proposed
concept, we will present an exploratory study in two steps. The
first step involves the evaluation of the system’s basic performance. The second step is a user study conducted during
two festivals of Media Art, where Vital ? Morph was presented as an interactive installation.

2 Design concept: bio-inspired principle
By designing Vital ? Morph, we explored a bio-inspired
approach not only as an aesthetic element, but also as a
way to find novel designs for distributing abstract data in
space, exploring ways to relate the data to material

AI & Soc

properties, and enabling interactions from the system’s
characteristics.
2.1 Life, data, and materials
The continuous production of information and communication of data are usually expressed through verbs such as
‘‘stream’’ and ‘‘flow’’. It is very common to refer to processes such as ‘‘data streaming’’ and ‘‘information flow’’.
Such expressions evoke the image of the relentless movement that characterizes natural elements like air and water.
In fact, this analogy can be extended to physiological
processes like blood circulation or respiration. By observing such expressions, we can note that the invisible
behavior of our information society is characterized by
elements of movement, changes in time, and production of
energy. However, this flow cannot be physically perceived
by humans. As a simple example, we cannot hold a stream
of water; we can just feel it by inserting the hands into a
torrent. Similarly, the flow of electrons or the waves of a
Wi-Fi network cannot be physically grasped. The use of
such expressions in daily life suggests that maybe the next
step in information society will involve us getting physically closer and connected to the unstoppable flow of
digital information and data production. Shape-changing
interfaces seem to be a suitable way of facilitating such a
shift. However, there is still a big gap: the difficulty in
finding materials that can offer the same malleability that
we can observe in simulations with 3D computer graphics
and real-time synthesis of digital sounds. We have imagined and designed a novel material, a material capable of
adapting its own characteristics to the flow, frequency and
amplitude of the information, in our case, the vital signs. It
should be similar to a rheological material, which is a
material that can change its physical state in response to a
received stimulus. For this, we have developed a perceptually equivalent system, which can mimic the behavior
and qualities of this imaginary material.
2.2 Diatoms
Biological organisms have inspired artists, designers and
engineers since a long time. Especially, architects have
often referred to organisms for finding novel forms, and
structural and aesthetic solutions. The impact can also be
observed in product design, wherein the curved and organic
styles have been used for rethinking the shape and form of
different objects such as cars and photographic cameras.
However, such bio-inspired approaches were only used for
designing and shaping static objects and architectural elements (Lynn 1999). Moreover, information flow and data
production happens in time. In his seminal work on biology, D’Arcy Thompson (1992) analyzes the evolution of

organisms from the point of view of his theory of transformation. He noticed that the form of an organism and its
evolution is an event in space and time. Most importantly,
he said that from a mathematical point of view ‘‘organic
form is found […] to be a function of time’’ (Thompson
1992). The aspect of time and its relations with shapechange thus becomes very important. Biological organisms
are also well known for their efficient use of material,
energy, and management of complex processes. Among the
vast variety of these organisms, diatoms generate considerable interest. Diatoms are a large group of microscopic
single-celled algae, which can be found in nearly every
habitat characterized by water. They possess some interesting functional, structural and topological characteristics.
We took some elements of diatoms as a reference for
designing the functions, behavior, and appearance of
Vital ? Morphs:
(a) Transformation of external stimuli: Diatoms are
regarded as one of the largest groups of photoplanktons,
which are organisms that, through a process of photosynthesis, take the sun’s energy and convert it into nutrients.
Because of this characteristic, diatoms represent one of the
most vital components in ocean and fresh water
ecosystems.
Implementation: Vital signs represent the ‘nutrient’ of
the material that is brought to life by translating abstract
data into physical motion and shape-change.
(b) Deformability: Diatoms not only take nutrients from
light, they also absorb them through water. This is made
possible by the elaborate perforations on their shell, made
of a silica-based material. The cell wall is composed of a
cytoskeletal structure called frustule that consists of two
halves. The combination of the structural and the material
qualities allows diatoms to perform significant deformations of their overall structure to withstand high loads.
Implementation Deformability became an important
aspect of the design of our interface. We decided to distribute different degrees of deformability among the different elements. One element is deformed by the received
data to display it through its surface, while another can be
actively deformed by the users.
(c) Morphology Diatoms grow as single cells. However,
they can form filaments and simple colonies. Such colonies
are composed of cells connected usually by organic threads
or by attaching to different substrates like plants.
Implementation From these characteristics, we derived
the modularity and spatial configuration of the global
Vital ? Morph interface as a colony of physicalizations.
(d) Monitoring and information retrieval Diatoms are
often specific to particular habitats because they exhibit
tolerance to different environmental variables such as the
chemical composition of the water in which they live. As a
result, diatoms are used extensively in environmental

123

AI & Soc

assessment and monitoring. Since the silica walls do not
decompose, diatom shells found in marine and lake sediments are used to interpret historical conditions of the
environment.
Implementation Even though in Vital ? Morph we have
not incorporated the possibility of retrieving historical
information, this function of diatoms, which allows them to
display information through the characteristics of their
shapes, is a fundamental concept used for the design of the
interface.

3 Background and related work
Our research builds on three main strands of related work.
First, we will discuss the most common strategies used in
clinical environments for making physiological data perceptible to users such as physicians. In contrast to these
approaches, we will then introduce some alternative
methods for presenting abstract data in home-like environments. Special attention will be given to examples that
explore the presentation of data through static physical
artifacts, the concept termed as data physicalization.
Lastly, we will extend such ideas through shape-changing
interfaces and review examples from recent literature.
Throughout this section, we will detail the background
research and the open issues related to our research.
3.1 Vital signs and remote monitoring
Vital signs are measurements of the body’s most basic
functions widely evaluated in healthcare. These measurements are taken to assess the general physical health conditions of a patient, to detect potential diseases in advance,
and to assess progress toward recovery. There are four
primary vital signs which are considered standard in most
medical settings: body temperature, heart rate, respiratory
rate, and blood pressure. For the simplest cases, the measurement and monitoring of vital signs are performed
directly by clinicians using their own senses or with the use
of technological aids such as thermometers and stethoscopes. Such direct monitoring is a practice that connects
the clinician and the patient through physical contact when
they are at the same location. However, with the introduction of information technology in clinical environments, the act of measurement and analysis has become
increasingly distinct (Nangalia et al. 2010). Now, between
the clinician and the patient, multiple stages and processes
have been devised. Measurements of vital signs are conducted using appropriate sensors and transmitted from the
patient to clinician. Such measurements can be integrated
with other historical data describing the state of the patient
to provide in-depth analysis and to facilitate decision-

123

making. Such a practice is commonly referred to as remote
monitoring, which can be defined as the use of telecommunication technologies to provide and support healthcare
when physical distance separates the participants. Patients
and clinicians can be in different cities, countries, continents, or even in planets (Korhonen et al. 2003; Cermack
2006). One of the first successful applications of remote
monitoring was observed in 1961, when the physiological
data of the first human in space—the Russian astronaut
Yuri Gagarin—were continuously monitored by doctors on
earth. Recently, in HCI, several researchers have proposed
the inclusion of family members and online communities in
remote monitoring to make it a less socially disorganizing
experience (Johnson and Ambrose 2006).
3.2 Perceptualization of physiological data
Even though many efforts have been made to develop new
bio-sensing techniques and signal processing algorithms, little
study has been conducted on the perceptualization of physiological data (Jovanon et al. 2001; Maciejewski et al. 2005).
By the term perceptualization, we refer to the process of
translation of abstract data and information into modalities
that appeal to a variety of human senses. In remote monitoring,
the most commonly used sense is the visual sense. Data are
commonly presented through dedicated displays (CRT and
digital screens) that visualize the different vital signs through
time-series plots such as waveforms, and numerical values
(Kusunoki et al. 2013). Such displays are an essential part of
clinical care. However, such a way of presenting physiological
measurements through waveform can be dated back to the first
recording of a human electrocardiogram (ECG) done in 1887
by Augustus Waller. Even with the introduction of computerbased monitoring, such displays and visualizations have
undergone little change (Görges and Staggers 2008). Only
small enhancements, such as color displays or the inclusion of
trending have been incorporated into displays (Drews and
Westenskow 2016). Along with the visual, the auditory and
haptic senses are also being addressed. Sound is mostly used
for alerting clinicians of critical events with acoustic feedback-like alarms (Dubus and Bresin 2014). Vibro-tactile displays attached on the physicians’ fingers have also been
proposed and tested in a possible combination with auditory
notifications (McLanders et al. 2014).
In recent years, multimodal type of displays has started
to attract the attention of researchers and clinicians (Bitterman 2006). However, little attention has been directed
towards finding alternative modalities for displaying clinical data that can be understood by ordinary people. If we
are evaluating the possibility of integrating remote monitoring into daily-life environments, different strategies for
the perceptualization of vital sign measurements should be
considered.

AI & Soc

3.3 Ambient displays
One way of making abstract data perceptible and integrating it with our living environments is through ambient
displays (Wisneski et al. 1998). These are interfaces that
convey information and abstract data to the user by
encoding information in elements available in living
environments, and presenting changes through output
modalities such as light, sound, and motion embedded in
devices that resemble household appliances (Heiner et al.
1999). The idea of ambient media emerged with the
introduction of the concept of Ubiquitous Computing
(Weiser 1991), and later, with the vision of Tangible Bits
(Ishii and Ullmer 1997). This vision was driven by the idea
of giving a physical form to digital information by making
bits tangible and directly manipulable through a seamless
coupling between physical objects and abstract data in the
real world by creating a proximity quality to everyday
human activities. Computation is widely spread in our
environment, but digital information does not possess any
inherent spatial layout or presence in the physical world.
Ambient displays have gained an increasing interest in the
community of HCI and Media Art, resulting in a growing
body of research that explores the design space and possible usage of ambient media. However, it was very difficult to introduce such displays in the market and most of
them still remain as prototypes. Through repeated user tests
it was noticed that even if the comprehension of an ambient
display increases over time, the display usage decreases
over a long period of time (Mankoff et al. 2003).
3.4 Data physicalization
Recent innovations in low-cost fabrication and embedded
computing have sparked a new interest in how physical
artifacts can present and integrate digital information into
our environment. Along with techniques such as data
visualization and sonification, Jansen et al. (2015) have
proposed data physicalization. Data physicalization is a
way of encoding abstract data into material properties and
using the inherent capabilities of objects to communicate
meaning and functionality using the natural affordances
they possess. This can lead to alternative representation
media that learn from humans’ experiences and interpret
the world around them. However, physical representations
of abstract data have been developed by humans since
centuries. Such a way of representing information also
played a role in shaping the horizons of science and culture
in the last century. Let us look back at the molecular
models of Penicillin created by Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin
in 1945, or the physical model of myoglobin developed in
1958 by Kendrew and colleagues. Such physicalizations
enabled better understanding of complex data sets and gave

spatial representation to elements such as molecules. Data
physicalization offers a multitude of potential benefits over
its purely visual and sonic counterparts (Willett et al.
2017). First, abstract data encoded in the material qualities
of a physical object can be directly manipulated. Such
characteristics are very different from those of ambient
displays, which are mostly based on ephemeral elements
(such as light and air) and are mostly designed as peripheral devices. Second, the physical modality can offer a
wider range of new possibilities for interaction compared
to on-screen visualizations since physicalizations require
active engagement from the user. If ambient displays are
good at showing changes of data over time, data physicalizations can better embody information in objects that
can be grabbed and actively explored by users. Third, data
physicalizations can be integrated into the life and environment of users, allowing the presentation of abstract
information in a more direct, complex and even pleasurable
way compared to other types of media used for information
presentation (Brown and Hurst 2012).
Data physicalizations can have also an artistic purpose.
Digital data have rapidly become a new ‘‘material’’ used by
artists to investigate the contemporary landscape. This
trend was exemplified by the term information aesthetics
(Manovich 2008), which describes visually pleasing artifacts that communicate information. An interesting example of information aesthetics is a data sculpture (Van de
Moere 2008), which is a direct representation of data in a
physical form with its only function being to convey the
suitable meaning to viewers. However, the data mapping
metaphor employed in data sculptures may not be immediately understandable. This forces viewers to reflect on the
process and on how data are embodied in a physical form.
Moreover, viewers must interpret these data-driven objects
by the affordances the objects convey. Information translated into physical artifacts can be grabbed, touched, and
carried like souvenirs or jewelry. An interesting example of
a data sculptures is the ‘‘Chemo Singing Bowl’’ (Barrass
2016). This is a 3D-printed sounding sculpture which
embodies the data of blood pressure recorded over a period
of 1 year from a patient who underwent chemotherapy for
breast cancer.
However, despite the many examples that have been
proposed, any investigation on the social impact and usage
of such type of displays is still at a nascent stage.
3.5 Shape-changing interfaces
While static physicalizations can be useful and attractive,
they must be designed and fabricated in advance, and
modifications of their physical characteristics are often
limited once created. If we refer to the original definition of
ambient displays, we can see that its proposition was to

123

AI & Soc

turn everyday architectural spaces into interfaces. By
changing the state of physical matter, ambient media can
contain and be controlled by data-driven values. Even if a
lot of work was done in controlling elements such as light
and sound for the sake of deploying information, we are
still exploring ways to make physical form equally
mutable and controllable. Recent approaches tried to
explore this possibility of controlling the physical characteristics of the interface (Vertegaal et al. 2008). Previous
studies in the field of tangible user interfaces (TUIs) made
use of physical actuation and motion as a way of
embodying digital information (Pangaro et al. 2002). This
was viewed as a ‘logical step’ in TUIs, where ‘‘physical,
tangible elements are not merely dynamically coupled to
the digital attributes and information, but are themselves
dynamic, self-reconfigurable devices that can change their
physical properties depending on the state of the interfaces,
the user, or the environment’’ (Poupyrev et al. 2007).
Mechanical actuation has been used to preserve the consistency between the digital and the physical world.
Examples include dynamic force-feedback displays for
virtual reality (Iwata et al. 2001, 2005) or physical renderings of computer-simulated 3D models.1
The definition of shape-changing interfaces was introduced for the first time by Coelho and Zigelbaum (2011)
for describing an emergent class of interfaces that aims to
make use of computationally enabled materials and soft
mechanics for the creation of transformable surfaces. This
concept was driven mainly by the availability and the
growing volume of research on the so-called smart materials. Shape-changing materials can be defined as materials
that undergo a mechanical deformation under the influence
of direct or indirect stimuli. Information delivery is a key
use of shape-change and dynamic data physicalization can
be considered as one of its most interesting and challenging
fields of applications.
However, most of the current dynamic physicalizations
make use of widely used visual metaphors borrowed from
data visualization such as pie charts2 and animated bar
charts (Follmer et al. 2013; Hardy et al. 2015; Taher et al.
2017). These shape-changing interfaces support the translation of pixel-based data by translating the change in a
pixel’s value into corresponding changes in height. This is
only one of the many possibilities that can be explored,
such as the mapping of data to physical variables of
materials such as smoothness, hardness, sponginess, all of
which provide additional feedback and methods for data
physicalization (Jansen et al. 2013). Shape-changing
interfaces have been also explored in the field of telepresence, such as rendering of physical parts of a distant user
1
2

https://artcom.de/en/project/kinetic-sculpture/.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/physical-charts/.

123

(Leithinger et al. 2014), or supporting intimate connections
by enriching mobile phones with shape-changing characteristics (Hemmert et al. 2013, Park et al. 2015). Even
though most of the examples mentioned above are presented using mechanical or pneumatic actuation, the longterm goal of such research is to directly control and make
use of material properties on a molecular level, and
embody digital information directly into material properties. This has led to exploration of techniques mutated from
chemistry and synthetic biology such as the use of magnetorheological materials (Wakita et al. 2010) and dynamic
skin synthesized by living cells (Yao et al. 2015). The
vision of ‘‘Radical Atoms’’ (Ishii et al. 2012) represents
one of the main driving forces in this research area because
it poses some very fundamental questions: how to interact
with physical interfaces that transform their shape, conform
to the constraints and inform users? But even as many
researchers have tried to answer such questions in different
ways in recent years, the answers are still not clear and are
mostly tentative.
Though such a long-term goal seems very exciting and
promising, the research on shape-changing interfaces is
still at a very nascent stage. As noted by Rasmussen et al.
(2012) there is a lack of application focus on specific
scenarios, and the direction this research will take is still
not clear. In addition, there are no shared or proven evaluation methods for such interfaces. This is because most of
the research is focused on exploring and developing
enabling technologies. The lack of adequate studies makes
it difficult to evaluate or imagine the potential social
impacts and implications of shape-changing interfaces.
We can see that even though the perceptualization of
vital signs has been investigated, only visual and auditory
displays have been considered. We have observed that
there are very few studies that have used dynamic physical
interfaces to present and display data, and even fewer
studies have investigated the interactions and social impact
of such shape-changing interfaces. Through Vital ? Morph, we aim to contribute to the current research on
dynamic data physicalizations by exploring the relations
between physiological data, materials, and shape-change in
the context of remote monitoring. We are particularly
interested in investigating design metaphors that differ
from current examples through a bio-inspired design.

4 Design requirements and system configuration
Vital ? Morph is composed of two main elements: (1) five
self-actuated devices enclosed in (2) a deformable container. We named the former Vitals and the latter Morph
(Fig. 2). In this section, we introduce the design guidelines
and functions of Vital ? Morph. We will simulate a

AI & Soc
Fig. 2 Three studies of the
form and spatial layouts of
Vital ? Morph inspired by
diatoms: a a paper model; b a
graphical representation; c a
physical model used for testing
the possible shapes and
dimensions

Fig. 3 A representation of the
envisioned scenario: remote
monitoring of a hospitalized
person by a family member
through the use of
Vital ? Morph

fictional scenario that we have developed to place
Vital ? Morph in context, and help readers understand the
aims of the project better. This scenario will also provide a
reference for the user study and future applications that will
be discussed later in this study. Lastly, we present the
design metaphor chosen for designing the appearance and
the functions.

and monitor the Vitals. They notice that the indicator
associated with the respiration is moving slow, while the
one that indicates the pulmonary arterial pressure is
behaving erratically. Before leaving home, Mr. Antonini
takes these two Vitals with him. The other family members
decide to split the others. In the evening, when they all
come back home, they will put them back together. Before
leaving, Mrs. Ohnuki slowly moves the Morph (Fig. 3).

4.1 Fictional scenario
4.2 Design guidelines
Mrs. Ohnuki lives in Japan with her husband Mr. Antonini
and their two children. Mr. Antonini’s mother, named
Giovanna, is hospitalized in Italy following a difficult
surgery. Since the couple lives in Japan, it is difficult for
them to remain updated about the condition of Giovanna,
which is quite complex. She suffers from respiratory issues
caused by the surgery and also due to her age, which is
80 years. The family in Japan has a Vital ? Morph
installed in their living room, barring the heart rate monitor, which Takeo, Mrs. Ohnuki’s son, keeps near his bed. In
the morning, the family members meet around the display

To implement our concept, we conceived three main
design guidelines. The first concerns the Vitals, the second
the Morph, and the third is a combination of both. The
different characteristics expressed by these guidelines will
be assessed and tested later in this study (Sects. 5 and 6)
through an evaluation of the system performances and a
use case.
(1) Dynamic physicalization of vital signs The Vitals
should not be designed for just analyzing data, but also for
interpreting, or feeling, it. Each Vital must be able to

123

AI & Soc

receive a specific stream of data, display it through shapechange of its surface, and address either the visual or the
tactile channel. In the current application, we choose five
vital elements, since this is the number of the fundamental
vital signs. In this case, the Vitals should also act as a
physical surrogate of a remotely located patient. With
respect to the form factor, the Vitals should be self-contained and autonomous (both in terms of power and communication capabilities) and have a shape and dimension
suitable for a human hand. The user must be able to grab
the Vitals from inside the Morph, and carry them around.
(2) Mediated remote touch The Morph must perform
two functions: (1) it should act as a constraint for the Vitals
by delimiting the area where they can be placed; (2) it
should be suitable for remote communication through
shape-sharing. If the Vitals are used for displaying the vital
signs received from the Hospital, the Morph is conceived
with the opposite function. It should enable two-way
communication between the two places. By linking two
Vital ? Morphs through an internet connection, it should
be possible for the patient and his/her relatives to communicate through the Morphs. The deformations caused on
one side are reflected on the other interface. Like the
Vitals, the shape-changing characteristics of the Morph
should be able to address and appeal to both the visual the
haptic senses.
(3) Social connectedness and co-monitoring By coupling the Vitals with the Morphs, a physical display can be
created. The relation between the Morph and Vitals should
be spatial. When both are combined, the five physicalizations (i.e., the Vitals) can be observed together in the same
space, next to each other. Users at home can get an overview of the overall status of the vital signs measured on the
patient. Comparisons can be made by looking at the Vitals.
Substantial changes in data can be detected by just
observing the characteristics of shape-change, such as
frequency and speed. The Morph should also invite users to
stay around it, to encourage group activity. Users should
also be able to remove the Vitals from the Morph. In this
case, the monitoring should become a more private and
intimate experience. In addition, users must be able to carry
the Vitals to different places, as we had discussed in the
fictional scenario.

5 Technical implementation and system
evaluation
In this section, we introduce the process of implementation
of Vital ? Morph. Its main components include a software
that simulates a vital sign monitoring station and the
physical elements including the Vitals and the Morphs. We
will also discuss the data selected for the current prototype.

123

Digital recordings
of Vital Signs
ECG
ART

Laptop server

RESP
PAP

client 3

Software

client 4
client 5

CVP

Morph B

client 1
client 2

Microcontroller

Vital 1
Vital 2
Vital 3
Vital 4
Vital 5

Morph A

Fig. 4 Representation of the communication flow in the Vital ? Morph system

The system architecture is shown in Fig. 4: a customized
software running on a laptop, which reads the recordings of
the vital signs and transmits them wirelessly to the Vitals.
Another subsystem manages the communication between
the two Morphs through a microcontroller.
5.1 Simulation of a vital sign monitoring station
5.1.1 Data selection
The signals used for this prototype are actual recordings of
a patient’s vital signs. We carefully select a specific dataset
from the PhysioBank, a public database of physiological
data.3 To make it similar to the scenario described in
Sect. 3, we selected a 24-h recording of an 80-year-old
woman hospitalized after surgery, who suffers from respiratory problems. Such a dataset helps us present a more
realistic version, which also includes actual problematic
and critical situations encountered. From the selected
dataset, we extracted five vital signs: heart rate (pulse),
arterial blood pressure (ART), pulmonary arterial pressure
(PAP), central venous pressure (CVP), and respiratory rate.
5.1.2 Software
We developed a software for simulating the tasks of a vital
sign monitoring system and for managing the wireless
communication. First, the software reads a text file that
contains the recordings of each vital sign. Since these
recordings have a very high fidelity and speed, we perform
a down-sampling of the dataset. Second, each data element
is scaled and formatted for transmission to the corresponding Vital element. For the communication protocol,
we choose Bluetooth. To keep a flexible environment, the
data are directly mapped to the control of the Vitals’
actuators. In the current version of the system, we
employed a direct mapping between the vital signs and the
actuators that they are going to control (Fig. 5). Using the
3

https://physionet.org/physiobank/.

AI & Soc
ART

2000
1000
0
-1000

30
20
10

6250

6252

6254

6256

6258

6260

6262

6264

6266

6268

0
6270

normalized data

raw data

Fig. 5 A sample of the arterial
pressure (ART) measurements
that show the relations between
the raw signal (original
recordings of vital signs) and
the normalized version
processed by the software

time in milliseconds (ms)

Fig. 6 A section of the Vital
highlighting the different
components: 1 microcontroller,
2 bluetooth transceiver, 3
lithium–polymer battery, 4
servo motor, 5 shaft and
direction of rotation, 6 spring, 7
paper cylinder

software, it is also possible to control the frequency of the
input data and to change the level of the mapping between
the signal and the degrees of rotation for controlling the
rotation of the actuator in the Vitals. A standard wave plotstyle visualization is also provided, which serves as a quick
debugging element and shows the vital signs to the audience in a form that they can easily understand.
5.2 Physical objects
5.2.1 Vitals
The Vitals are composed of an actuation system, a
microcontroller, a Bluetooth transceiver, and a power
source encapsulated in a custom-made structure and surrounded by a deformable cylindrical surface (Fig. 6). To

implement the desired shape-changing features, we
designed an actuated surface that resembles the features of
the bio-inspired material described in the previous section. Our aim is to provide a physical shape-changing
display that can represent the differences in the behavior of
data over time through deformations. Their surface should
be able to deform continuously and reproduce each stream
of data consistently.
The biggest challenge was the implementation of the
mechanism for deformation. Some work has already been
done regarding soft robotics involving the design and
implementation of simple robots that are able to deform
and adapt themselves to the changing conditions of the
environment. An interesting example is the circular robot
developed by Sugiyama and Hirai (2006). This robot is
modeled as a rheological object and it is composed of a

123

AI & Soc

series of eight shape-memory alloys (SMAs) type actuators
attached to a rubber shell. When such actuators contract,
they cause a deformation of the shell. For the sake of
portability and autonomy, we adopted a similar approach
but with a single actuator—a micro servo type of motor.
This enables the precise control of angular position,
velocity and acceleration. Since the deformation of the
surface is caused by a single actuator, a series of customized horns have been developed. Each servo motor is
equipped with four extended horns, two on the upper part
connected directly to the active shaft of the motor, and two
in the lower part, connected to the extensions attached to
the passive one. The horns on the top of the actuator are
then vertically linked to a passive rotational shaft placed on
the bottom of the structure. Such extensions are then
attached to the surface through four small springs. The
deformation is caused by the rotary motion of the servo
motor. The data are received by the microcontroller that
controls the angular position (degrees). When the shaft of
the servo rotates, the springs pull the surface and this
causes a deformation. When the actuator is at 0 of rotation, it means that the data received are at the minimum
value. In such a case, the Vital appears to be a static
cylinder. Since the movement of the actuator is transmitted
to the surface through springs, they not only deform the
surface, but also produce a noticeable force every time the
servo motor rotates. In other words, each time the values
change from low to high (and vice versa) the actuator
moves and the springs release a force (Fig. 7). For the
deformable surface, we used a cylinder made of paper that
was coated with a layer of liquid latex. This helps increase
the deformation effect, prevents tearing of the paper, and
makes the material feel similar to the human skin. The
cylindrical surface is then attached to the bottom of the
actuation module through a plastic stand. This prevents the
cylinder from moving freely and also enhances the quality
of the shape-changing effect. In addition, we have fabricated a skin made of a four-way stretchable fabric that can

allow the elements to be covered and to hide the entire
mechanism, if so desired.
5.2.2 Morphs
The Morph is designed as a robotic input–output surface,
composed of a closed link system of actuators and joints
(Fig. 8). In the current implementation, the Morph is presented in two synchronized deformable surfaces, which can
be placed in two different environments. In contrast to the
shape-change of the Vitals, where the deformation occurs
in response to data, the deformation in the Morph is produced by the direct action of the users. When a user
deforms one element, it transmits its current shape to the
other that will then reproduce it. This action can also be
done in both ways. We have defined this function as shapesharing. This concept describes the usage of paired remote
Controls

Link

Actuator

Fig. 8 Closed link system of the Morph elements

Fig. 7 a The five Vitals used in Vital ? Morph. b The deformations produced by the data stream on one Vital (ECG)

123

Passive joint

AI & Soc

robotic systems for teleoperation, and it was previously
introduced by Sekiguchi et al. (2001) to describe their
RobotPHONE system. This system uses two robotic arms
placed in different locations. Such robotic elements are
embedded into a stuffed puppet and are arranged in a
master–slave configuration. Using the concept of a telephone call, wherein a user applies a force to one arm and
transmits the movement to the paired device, we adapted it
for designing the Morph by abolishing the master–slave
relation between the two devices, and instead established
an equal relation between the devices. The Morphs have a
circular shape that mirrors that of the Vitals. Both the
Morphs are composed of a series of eight actuators linked
together. We choose an analog-feedback servo motor,
which combines position sensing and mechanical movement in a single element. Then, the motors are connected to
each other using a customized linkage.
In the current version, the two Morphs are connected
and synchronized through a microcontroller (Arduino
Mega), which implements a direct mapping between the
position sensor of the actuators in one Morph and the
position control of the motors in the linked Morph, and
vice versa. An internet-based version is currently under
development.
Finally, the actuators are covered with a soft surface
composed of an elastic fabric reinforced internally with a
sponge material. This element helps enrich the tactile
qualities of the device, and makes it more appealing by
hiding the mechanical components (Fig. 9).

6 Performance evaluations of the system
In this section, we present an evaluation of the basic performances of Vital ? Morph. Such tests serve to assess
two main design requirements: the ability of the Vitals to
produce haptic feedback through shape-change and to

Fig. 9 Two interconnected Morphs

confirm that the two interconnected Morphs can transmit
their shape correctly.
6.1 Haptic quality of data physicalization
To prove the effectiveness of our implementation, we
measured the force produced by one Vital element corresponding to the changes in data. The force was measured
through a series of tests by attaching a piezoelectric force
sensor to a user’s index finger and recording the moments
when the surface of one of the Vitals touches it. From the
sensor, we also recorded the variations in the voltage for a
period of 10 min. We repeated the measurement for each
different type of data. At the same time, the position of the
actuator was also recorded. Figure 10 depicts two samples:
one is related to the ECG and the second is for respiration.
It is observed that a force is generated when there is a
consistent change in the data (peaks). At its highest value,
the recorded force corresponds to 0.8 N, which is enough
to be perceived by an average user. The respiration data
analysis shows the reason that the values are very low and
not changing, which indicates a critical condition of the
patient. Visually this is represented by an almost static
appearance on the device. When a user looks at the Vitals,
the deformation of the surface makes the flow of the data in
time visually perceptible. In addition, the user can also feel
the changes in the data by touching. Even a small variation
can produce a noticeable force. Through such an evaluation, we can confirm that the Vitals can provide haptic
feedback based on one important characteristic of the data,
such as the maximum change. This shows that dynamic
data physicalization can address not only the vision, but
also the sense of touch.
6.2 Shape-sharing capabilities
To assess the amount of error that occurs in the transmission of shape between two linked Morphs, we performed a
series of measurements to compare the area of the sender
and the receiver Morph. We selected three main gestures,
which have been derived through the observation of users
(see Sect. 8). These are (1) horizontal squeeze, (2) vertical
squeeze, and (3) a gesture randomly selected that cannot be
classified into the previous two categories (Fig. 11). The
first two gestures represent the maximum contraction
possible, respectively, horizontally and vertically. On the
other hand, the third category of gesture includes more
subtle deformations that can involve only some parts of the
shape, or simple variations of the static circular shape. The
test was performed by placing two Morphs close to the
each other. We recorded 10 trails per gesture with a video
camera. After the acquisition, we selected and isolated the
frames where the transmission of the shape happened.

123

AI & Soc

ECG
40

30

20

10

60
50
40
30
20
10

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

0
2120

force measured in millivolts (mV)

rotation in degrees (°)

50

time in milliseconds (ms)

Respiration
26.5

26

25.5

25

60
50
40
30
20
10

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

0
2120

force measured in millivolts (mV)

rotation in degrees (°)

27

time in milliseconds (ms)

Fig. 10 Two samples that show the relation between the position of the actuator (corresponding to the measured vital sign) and the force
measured on a user’s finger. The chosen samples are for the electrocardiogram and the respiration impedance

Fig. 11 Examples of the reproduction of the shape between a transmitting (X) and a receiving (Y) Morph. Three different gestures are presented:
1 horizontal squeeze, 2 vertical squeeze, 3 other type of deformation

Then, we have traced the area of each shape. Since it
represents a complex and non-uniform curve, we simplified
its geometry. By superimposing a grid made of equal cells,
we calculated the area of each shape using the Pick’s
theorem. For each gesture, we calculated the mean area for
the sender (X) and the receiver (Y). Then, we derived the

123

difference between the two areas and consequently the
percentage of the error in the transmission. It was found
that the lowest error is observed in gesture 3 (?0.02%).
The error observed in the gesture number 1 and 2,
respectively, are ?0.3% for the horizontal and ?0.2% for
the vertical squeeze. Since these two gestures represent

AI & Soc

very extreme contractions, we can conclude that it is very
difficult to reproduce extreme contractions or expansions.
One of the reasons can be found in the friction produced
between the actuators at the surface.
Another element that is relevant to shape transmission is
time, which dictates how fast the deformation is and for
how long the act of deformation is performed. We have
observed that slow deformations ([45 s) generate better
results in shape reproduction while faster deformations are
more likely to negatively affect the accuracy of
transmission.

7 User study in media art exhibitions: aims
and issues
Vital ? Morph was exhibited at the Arts Electronica Festival (Linz, Austria) and the Tsukuba Media Art Festival
(Tsukuba, Japan), respectively, in September and December 2016. The former is one of the major international
events in the field of Media Art, while the latter is a local
event mostly attended by families and amateur enthusiasts.
During these occasions, we had the opportunity of
observing how a varied audience interacts with Vital ? Morph, and of investigating their reactions and opinions.
We conducted a user’s study using a mixed method of
observations, notations and non-structured interviews.
Through this study, we wanted to assess the social acceptance of Vital ? Morph and examine how shape-change is
perceived by users. Moreover, we were also interested in
obtaining a better understanding of the social impact of
such interfaces, the concerns they raise and the opportunities they present.
7.1 User studies in media art exhibitions
In the past, we have found that media art exhibitions represent an interesting platform for testing interactive systems outside the laboratory (Iwata 2005). Hands-on
demonstrations in an open environment should not just be
considered a way of testing an interactive device, but also
an essential step of the research process. This is more
relevant for systems and interfaces characterized by
unconventional interactions and unique appearances.
Venues like Media Art festivals and exhibitions can provide many benefits for a qualitative research. First, they
help reach a very large group of possible users, composed
of people of different ages, genders, nationalities, and
degrees of expertise with interactive technologies. Second,
such events remain open for a long period of time, allowing
people to freely try and evaluate the system. Third, by
interacting with the audience, it is possible to conduct
unstructured interviews.

7.2 Problem statement
The evaluation and assessment of shape-changing interfaces is a problematic aspect that characterizes this
research area. Due to their unique characteristics, shapechanging interfaces cannot be compared to other systems.
Moreover, there are no standardized measurements and
frameworks available for performing an effective evaluation. In particular, the investigation of the social acceptance
of shape-changing interfaces is still one of the biggest
unanswered questions in the research community (Rasmussen et al. 2012). To our knowledge, only one study has
been published (Park et al. 2015) with the aim of investigating the effect of shape-change in a real-life scenario,
using an ethnographic method. However, this study was
limited to shape-change applied to existing mobile devices
and between loving couples.
For our study, due to the difficulties of testing the system in a real scenario (hospital), we have designed an
ambient installation where Vital ? Morph was placed. It
represents an approximation of the experience we wanted
to assess. This approach is used in many exhibits and
museums for providing a context in which artifacts can be
better understood by visitors.
7.3 Test environment and exhibition design
Vital ? Morph was presented to the audience through a
setting that can help them contextualize the system into an
environment that tries to explicitly replicate the scenario
we had developed in Sect. 3. The spatial arrangement,
lighting, and furnishing are used for supporting the narration of the story. The exhibition space consisted of a unique
room that we divided in two spaces: a ‘‘home’’ area and a
‘‘hospital’’ area. These spaces are divided by a curtain
(Fig. 12).
When the audience first enters the room, they get into
the ‘‘home’’ area, and the ‘‘hospital’’ space is hidden
behind the curtain. The ‘‘home’’ area plays the role of a
living room where people can meet and gather around
Vital ? Morph. The interface is placed on the top of a
white plinth (100 9 50 9 50 cm). A spotlight is used for
highlighting these elements. When the audiences cross the
curtain, they find themselves in the ‘‘hospital’’ area. On one
side of the room, we created a simple version of an ICU
with a bed and a monitor, which represents the stream of
vital signs with a standard wave plot visualization. Near the
bed, on a second white plinth, we placed a second
Vital ? Morph, but without the Vitals and only the shapesharing interface. In this area, the plinth is shorter
(50 9 50 9 50 cm), because we wanted to force the
audience to interact with the interface by sitting on the bed,

123

AI & Soc

Fig. 12 1 Plan of the installation; 2 the actual set up at the Arts Electronica Festival

like any hospitalized person will do. The bed and the
second Vital ? Morph are also highlighted using two
spotlights.
7.4 Subjects
During the exhibition at the Arts Electronica Festival, more
than 600 people visited the installation. The festival lasted
for 5 days, and the exhibition was opened for 8 h per day.
We observed around 200 people actively interacting with
Vital ? Morph, out of which we interviewed 40 people. In
this context, the audience was composed of a very wide
variety of respondents with an almost equal distribution
between males and females, with an average age ranging
between 15 to 70 years. Most of the visitors were from
European countries (especially Austria, Germany, and
Italy), but we also tried to include visitors from the UK,
USA and countries like China, Japan, and South Korea. On
the other hand, at the Tsukuba Media Art Festival, majority
of the audience was Japanese. Moreover, here, the gender
distribution was almost equal, with a similar range of age,
but a significant proportion of visitors included families
with young children. The Tsukuba Media Art Festival
lasted for 8 days, open for 7 h each day. Being a local
venue, the number of visitors was lower as compared to the
Arts Electronica Festival: with 200 people visiting our
installation and 100 interacting with our system. Here, we
interviewed 20 participants. In both the exhibitions, the
audience was composed of first-time users of Vital Morph.
7.5 Methodology
Each visitor was introduced to the installation with a verbal
explanation of the aims and the concept of the installation.
This was done through an oral narration of the fictional
scenario. Till then, we had not informed the users about the
interactions and usages of the system. They were then able
to test Vital ? Morph without any constraint and for as
long as they wanted to. During the two exhibitions, most of

123

the visitors came in groups of two to six people. We
observed the users and noted down the sequence of their
interactions. After the observation stage, we asked the
users some specific questions to assess the perceptual
qualities of the interface. Lastly, we encouraged the visitors
to talk freely about their overall experience with the system
and to give their opinions regarding the social impact of
Vital ? Morph. We collected the answers and then selected the most common and significant responses to arrive at
relevant results.

8 Results
In this section, the results of the user study are presented.
The results of the observations regarding the behavior of
the users towards Vital ? Morph are then assessed by a
series of interviews with the aim of probing the experience
of the visitors.
8.1 Observations of users’ behavior
Through a constant observation of the behavior of the
visitors, we recognized a series of recurrent interactions
that the users performed with Vital ? Morph. These
actions were categorized by following the chronological
order in which they happened and divided into four macrointeractions. By macro-interactions, we mean a general
interaction that groups some different variations of a similar interaction. Such kind of classification is required
because shape-changing and organic interfaces allow for
continuous interactions. These are characterized by different levels of nuances that are very difficult to categorize
with the use of strict terminologies. The observations that
follow have helped us to validate the effectiveness of the
interactions possible with Vital ? Morph.
Observing and exploring At first, we noticed that almost
all users (97%) were observing the Vital ? Morph placed
in the ‘‘house’’ area. If it was a group, they were gathering

AI & Soc

around the plinth where Vital ? Morph was placed. Very
few visitors (3%) went behind the tent before stopping in
the first part of the installation. After a period of observation that typically lasted between 1 min to 3 min, the
users started to touch the different parts of the interface.
Because of their constant movement, the Vitals were the
elements that immediately attracted the visitors’ attention.
Re-composing and de-composing After a brief inspection, usually one of the visitors was grabbing one Vital and
removing it from the Morph. We have defined such an
action as de-composing. By holding it in his/her hands, the
users started to report to others their feelings and thoughts.
If there was a group of people, the person with the Vital
was passing it to another user. For example, parents where
passing it to their children. After this first exploration, other
people where grabbing the remaining Vitals. With the
Vitals in their hands, people were commenting to each
other and developing a series of thoughts mostly about
their tactile experience. In addition, an exchange of different Vitals among users was observed. Phrases like ‘pass
me the heart beat’ or ‘take the respiration’ were accompanying such actions. Visitors also were moving around the
installation while holding the Vitals in their hands. After a
period ranging from 2 to 7 min, the users put the Vitals
back inside the Morph as a final action. We have named
this action as re-composing, and it can be viewed as the
consequence of the first action of de-composing. We
observed that most of the people were re-composing the
interface together (90%) and only a few left them alone
(10%). Subsequently, when Vital ? Morph came back to
the initial state, the visitors reverted to the observation
phase (Fig. 13).
Shape-sharing Between the actions of de-composing
and composing, when all the Vitals had been removed from
inside the Morph, visitors started to pay attention to the
Morph. At this stage, the users where already moving
around the installation. The identification of the functions
of the Morph was slower compared to those of the Vitals

and happened through several steps. Usually, when visitors
were crossing the curtain and moving from the ‘‘house’’
area to the ‘‘hospital’’ area, they discovered the other
Morph placed near the bed. At this point, a user would sit
on the bed and start to touch the Morph. The visitors
identified that the two Morphs were connected and synchronized when a person in the ‘‘house’’ area was notifying
the other with sentences like ‘It’s moving!’ or other oral
comments confirming that the interface was responding.
From this moment, the users on the two sides were trying to
test and explore the possible ways of interacting with the
Morphs. Most of the users were manipulating the Morph
with two hands (85%), a few with one hand (5%), and
some even with a single finger (8%). Some people performed other actions (2%) such as lifting the Morph.
Within the actions performed with two hands the two most
one finger
5%
one hand
8%

other 2%
other
10%

two hands
85%

vertical
squeeze
30%

horizontal
squeeze
60%

a
one hand 8%
not moving
5%
watching
20%
other
2%

two hands
70%

other
15%

hugging
80%

b
Fig. 14 Interactions with the Morphs as an input device (a) and as an
output (b). Details will be provided in the discussion

Fig. 13 Users interacting with
the Vitals at the a Tsukuba
Media Art Festival and at the
b Arts Electronica Festival

123

AI & Soc

Fig. 15 Recordings of the interactions between two Morphs. We can devise four types of gestures performed by users: 1 still, not moving, 2
vertical squeeze, 3 horizontal squeeze, 4 other type of deformation

Fig. 16 Visitors interacting
with the Morphs: a at the Arts
Electronica Festival and b at the
Tsukuba Media Art Festival

common actions were squeezing the interface horizontally
(60%) and the vertically (30%). Only a very small percentage of users (10%) tried to perform other types of
manipulations (Fig. 14). This can be noticed by looking at
the recordings of the position sensors of the actuators in the
Morphs. From Fig. 15, it is possible to notice a sample
wherein such recurrent actions can be devised. Earlier, we
had observed that time was an important element in the
development of such actions. We observed that the
majority of users (98%) tried to deform the Morph very
quickly at first. However, after some attempts, these users
were trying to reduce the speed of their movements and
performing their actions at a much slower pace. The
interaction with the Morphs was usually the longest,
ranging from 1 min (the shortest) to 10 min (the longest),
with an average of 6 min. However, we noticed that the
users that spent more time interacting with the Morphs
([ 5 min) were keen to try different manipulations.
Tactile communication The use of the Morphs was not
only limited to active deformations of the interface
(Fig. 16). It can also reproduce and play back such deformations. Before responding to a stimulus, users where
taking time to feel the deformations produced by the

123

Morph on their body. It was interesting to observe how
people were experiencing this shape-sharing function as an
output. The use of both hands as a way to feel the motion
was the most common (90%). It was done by placing the
palm of their hands along the sides of the Morph. In
addition, we observed many users placing their arms in a
manner mimicking the gesture of hugging (10%). Very few
tried to use other body parts such as the face (2%).
8.2 Interviews
The analysis of the results of the interview process demonstrated homogeneity in the type of responses from visitors in
both the exhibitions. After a process of analysis of the various
answers and comments provided by the users, we identified
six major topics: emotional response, design choices, tactile
and kinesthetic communication, multi-sensory interactions,
social impact, and criticalities (Fig. 17).
Emotional response At first, the users were queried
about their emotional response to the experience, especially how they perceived Vital ? Morph. The most
recurrent comment can be summarized with the expression
‘it looks like a living organism’ (95%). Several visitors

Tactile and
kinesthetic
communication

Design and
material choices

Fig. 17 Results of the
interview process. Details are
provided in Sect. 8.2

Emotional
response

AI & Soc

The change of shape have increased my experience
I can't understand the relations between Vital Signs
and shape-change
It looks like a living organism
Indifferent / no answer
It feels good in my hands
The change of shape have increased my experience
It’s like hugging
Importance of the quality of the movement
Importance of the correct reproduction of the shape
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

Percantage (%)

made similar comments using other words such as ‘‘organs’’, ‘‘insects’’, or ‘‘hamsters’’. More detailed comments
emerged after visitors held the Vitals on their hands. At this
stage, the most recurrent comments were ‘it’s like holding
a human heart’, and ‘I feel like I’m touching a blob’. Some
users also related the feeling to the force produced by the
Vitals. One user described ‘The force I feel, it’s kind of
pulsating…It moves in my hands. I can feel something
rhythmical. It’s constant but sometimes it changes. I think
it’s something alive’. Irrespective of the kind of vital sign
that was displayed, the users strongly identified the system
with something living, and related their experience with
imaginative ideas, like having a living organ between their
hands. Aside from such comments, some users felt a sort of
mismatch between the feelings and the ability of understanding the meaning of the shape-change. ‘I can feel, yes,
but I don’t know exactly what it means’. Others were
demanding more clarity in the representation of data ‘I
don’t know if this movement is right or wrong’ or ‘I would
like to have a reference point. For example, I don’t know
how to judge this motion. Is this heart beat rate good or
not?’ Some of these visitors even commented ‘I’m not able
to understand the relations between the vital signs and the
movement’. However, when asked to comment if the
change in shape increased their perception of data, 80% of
the visitors answered positively.
Design and material choices Throughout our survey, we
recorded a general appreciation of the aesthetics and feel of
the interface. Moreover, many users appreciated the tactile
qualities of the system. Comments such as ‘It feels good in
my hands’ (60%) and ‘I like the feeling when I’m touching
it’ (40%) were equally distributed towards both the Vitals
and the Morphs. Children were especially attracted by the
possibility of being engaged in different haptic experiences. Being an interface highly based on tactile elements,
Vital ? Morph shows that to make shape-changing

interfaces acceptable, the choice of the materials used plays
a key element in the design.
Tactile and kinesthetic communication The interaction
with the Morph elements was another element we assessed
during the interviewing process. We were especially
interested in understanding if shape-sharing can be
understood by users and in identifying the ways in which
they approach it. Contrary to our expectations, users valued
the quality of the movement produced (70%) more than the
correct reproduction of the shape. Many commented that
there was a difference between fast and slow movements.
‘When I’m using it (the Morph) I like to move it fast. When
I receive it I like the slow movements’. Then, we asked the
visitors to comment about their experience. Most of them
were interested in exploring the two-way communication.
However, they looked lost and found it difficult to understand how this communication should be performed. ‘This
seems to be a conversation. Two people communicating…but I have never experienced something like
this…however it’s fun’. ‘I have no idea no idea how to
develop a way of communicating. I mean, it seems easy,
you have just to move it. But I don’t know what it means.
Especially I don’t know the meaning when I see the
answer, when the other person’s motion is played on the
one I’m facing. I don’t know’. Some users highlighted that
the absence of audio and video for remote communication
resulted in a diminished experience. ‘Usually I use the
phone or Skype to communicate with friends. This is
something that I have never experienced. You have to
touch it’. ‘I find this way of communication very interesting, normally you share your voice, not movements’.
When asked to comment about how they perceived the
Morphs, users related it to gestures like hugging and
embracing another person. ‘For me this is similar to hugging, like when you hold a person with your arms’; ‘I will
say that it reminds of the gestures you use when you

123

AI & Soc

embrace someone, usually a parent, a friend’. A common
comment that was following such sentences was highlighting such limitations. Many users felt that to really
perceive such tactile communication, temperature is missed. ‘In order to communicate the sensation of hugging,
and especially the feel that another person is being hugged,
besides the force and the shape, warmth of the arms are
very important. Without it it’s just like cold, like technology’ and ‘I would like to feel the temperature of the others,
like the warmth or coldness of the hands’.
However, 80% of the users said that these characteristics
improved their feeling of being connected to another person. An interesting comment was ‘It’s very abstract but…it
makes me imagine the other, what is doing, what is
thinking’.
Social impact In the last part of the interview process,
we asked the visitors to freely comment on the possible
introduction of Vital ? Morph in their lives. The majority
of users expressed surprise and interest about the system.
This could be because most of the visitors had never
experienced a shape-changing interface in the past. In
addition, the purpose of Vital ? Morph generated a positive interest. Especially, visitors of an age exceeding
40 years often related their experience with Vital ? Morph
with their own personal stories of having parents or relatives hospitalized in reanimation or Intensive Care Units. ‘I
remember when my mother was hospitalized years ago…I
cannot say if I wanted to have this (Vital ? Morph) at that
time…but it makes me think…actually, I was really nervous sometimes because of the distance…however, I don’t
know because I have never used something like this (Vital ? Morph). But the distance, the sensation of being
powerless was high’ or ‘Last year my brother was in a
hospital after a surgery, I was thinking what would have
been…because it’s true in these situations you are not
aware of what is happening, you are distant. You can visit
them only few times. Especially like me that I was living
far away. He was not able to talk at the phone for weeks’.
We should note that many of the oldest members of the
audience suggested that an interface like Vital ? Morph
can be very useful in the current aging society, because it
can add a more physical and tactile dimension to the possibility of being aware of the conditions of a distant patient.
‘You know, here in Japan we are an aging society. People
are getting old and the younger are very busy’; another ‘I
think it can be really useful in the future. We lost contact
with people, physical contact. I will encourage such ways
to create a more physical contact among people’. We also
collected the opinions of a group of four visitors that are
working in an Intensive Care Unit in a hospital in Austria.
They emphasized on the issues of communication between
the ICUs and the outside. In their opinion, finding a novel
way to connect people in this situation is very important.

123

‘In an Intensive Care Unit everything is very complex,
even the light…the communication is really problematic’;
another adds ‘I have never thought about this possibility…it’s a strange concept’, ‘it’s true communication there
(in the ICUs) it’s a real problem, especially with the
outside’.
Critical points Apart from these comments, we recorded
some very critical reactions. One explained that ‘it’s a very
creepy […] I don’t want it’, another ‘It’s noisy, it’s
weird…I don’t know…when I see all of these things
moving (the Vitals) like this (makes a gesture that mimics
their movement, like wobbling) it makes me suffering
because seems to me that someone is suffering’. A third
articulated her concern more strongly ‘I will be really
scared of having such device in my house […] and if it will
stop ? […] this can become a strong reminder of death’.
These visitors were extremely concerned about having this
constant presence in their lives and opined that they would
find it difficult to handle a surrogate of a person who is
probably suffering. The system malfunctions can become a
serious issue since they can be related to a much more
tragic event. In addition, these users highlight that
Vital ? Morph can be really invasive in their daily lives,
by being a constant reminder of the condition of a loved
one.

9 Discussion of the results
Our findings and contributions point to a series of design
implications for using dynamic data physicalization for
remote monitoring. We have identified five main implications that concern the design of the physical interface and
the social impact and acceptance of Vital ? Morph.
9.1 Data aliveness
As observed by many comments made by users, the association between shape-change and vital signs appears to be
very powerful. In addition, having a physical display that
exhibits the qualities of a living organism seems to enrich
the embodiment of data through shape-change. These
claims are also supported by the recent literature in actuated tangible and shape-changing interfaces that has
emphasized the importance of designing life-like movements for conveying meanings (Schmitz 2010; Hemmert
et al. 2013; Park et al. 2015). However, physical animation
is not enough. The combination with tactile feedback
proved to be fundamental to let people experience different
characteristics of the data displayed by the shape-changing
surface of the Vitals. In contrast, users have asked for
richer haptic experiences when the only act was a communication between two people, such as in the case of the

AI & Soc

Morphs. The interplay between visual and tactile clues in
Vital ? Morph suggests a careful consideration of the
design and distribution of these two sensory characteristics
among the interface.
9.2 Physical presence of the abstract
We found that shape-change, either visual, tactile or both is
not enough by itself. The type of data that drives the
actuation must be clear. As presented in the observations
and later observed during the interviews, this association
helped users increase their sense of closeness and
engagement with the data and the distant persons. Previous
studies revealed that sharing physiological signals can
facilitate and promote connectedness by making distant
people feel closer (Sommerer and Mignonneau 2004;
Janssen et al. 2010). It seems that people tend to interpret a
shared physiological signal (such as heartbeat) as a part of
the other, which suggests to them that a distant person is
physically closer. A single signal can become a representation of an entire absent body. This is connected to a
phenomenon defined by Garnæs et al. (2007) as ‘‘presencein-absence’’. According to Slovák et al. (2012), such
physical connection can be compared to the one triggered
by physical tokens of loved ones that people keep close as a
reminder of a distant person. Especially the Vitals have
suggested that when an object becomes enhanced with realtime physiological signals, it can serve as a strong representation of the distant other. In addition, the use of tangible objects as ‘‘physical surrogates’’ has proven to be an
intuitive method of sustaining long-distance relationships
(Greenberg and Kuzuoka 1999). A recent research in social
robotics (Nakamichi et al. 2014) opined that even a very
simple and almost abstract appearance of an intelligent
device can be a very powerful factor for conveying a sense
of physical presence.
9.3 Remote monitoring as a tactile experience
As we already noticed, an interesting characteristic of
shape-changing interfaces is that they serve as an effective
type of multi-sensory display. In the case of Vital ? Morph, the visuo-tactile elements are present at the same
time, but they become perceptible to the user only when he/
she changes the interaction. By only looking at the interface, the temporal characteristics of the signals are
revealed. When the user inserts his/her hand in the interface and grabs a Vital, it become conscious of the changes
in data through the tactile channel. These two characteristics of the signal do not have to be selected explicitly, but
the user has to change the type of interaction. This is
achieved in a very natural way, just like grabbing an object.
From our point of view, such interactions with shape-

changing materials have the potential to shift data exploration from a purely analytic activity to a more phenomenological one. Most of the current research in tactile
display employs a co-located tactile and visual feedback
through the use of video projection on actuated surfaces
(Leithinger et al. 2014; Lindlbauer et al. 2016). Such
solutions can obviously enrich the interface with a more
detailed and rich feedback, but it still implies a separation,
which shape-changing interfaces aim to reduce.
9.4 Sociality and emergence
Remote monitoring was always considered to be an activity
performed by specialists. Usually this is also assumed to be
an association between a physician and a patient, not other
people such as family members. By observing the actions
of de-composing and re-composing, it is possible to notice
that Vital ? Morph can potentially promote remote monitoring as a social activity. This can be enabled both by the
form factor (the use of circular shapes) and functional
elements (the modularity of the interface). This is supported by the research on TUIs, where circular tabletop
arrangements of digitally augmented objects have shown a
high potential to promote collaboration and social inclusion
(Kaltenbrunner et al. 2006). However, such elements are
derived by the chosen design metaphor, a group of biological organisms called diatoms. A bio-inspired metaphor,
if used not only for aesthetic reasons but as a reference for
designing a system, can help simplify and organize complex relations and make interactions between users and the
interface seem like emergent phenomena.
9.5 Involvement and distance
Translating abstract data into a physical form seems to
make users more likely to question the process of how data
get represented. This is especially true with very sensitive
measurements such as vital signs. As suggested by the
comments that we have collected, users reacted by pointing
out many issues and made numerous comments, and also
offered suggestions. As we mentioned, proper evaluation of
shape-changing interfaces for data physicalization is a very
problematic task. We see our contribution as an addition to
the growing variety of alternative data representations.
Only by increasing the diversity in the digital ecosystem
will it be possible to understand and evaluate which kind of
display and metaphor works better, and for which type of
data. This will tell the extent to which people would like to
be involved in the process of understanding, manipulating,
and getting engaged with data. Even if we have reported
some very critical comments, they actually reinforce the
idea behind the power of dynamic physicalization of data.
Such a way of representing data does not make people

123

AI & Soc

indifferent. Even if it was a minority, we found such critical comments insightful and helpful in addressing some
elements that are usually not considered in the design and
evaluation of novel shape-changing interfaces.

In this era, wherein we are witnessing a convergence
between digital fabrication, smart materials, and interconnected devices, it is important to develop strategies and
methodologies for making abstract data perceptible to users
and integrate it into our daily lives.

10 Future work

Acknowledgements We would like to thank Kai Sasaki and Shori
Kano for the help provided during the development of Vital ? Morph. In addition, we want to thank Prof. Hideaki Kuzuoka,
Masakazu Hirokawa, and Alessio Chierico for the fruitful discussions
and comments provided during the development of this manuscript.

A lot more work is needed for deploying Vital ? Morph in
real-life scenarios and it will require some very critical
steps. At first, some of the technical issues should be
resolved, such as issues related to power and actuation. The
progress in embedded systems and novel materials can also
help make the Vitals even smaller, so that they can occupy
lesser space. Apart from such technical implementations, it
is essential to conduct a research involving hospitals,
patients and their families. Moreover, if the final goal is the
deployment of Vital ? Morph in society, the research
cannot be dissociated from improvement in policies and
infrastructure for sharing private and clinical data among
public networks. This is a discussion that goes beyond the
scope of this study.

11 Conclusion
Our user study confirmed the effectiveness of the prototype, in terms of social acceptance, conceptual understanding, and design metaphor. Vital ? Morph was
designed as a new kind of shape-changing interface oriented to ordinary people. We wanted to explore a novel
way of getting engaged with vital signs through dynamic
data physicalization. We gathered very insightful comments, especially the negative comments underlining the
fact that such a way of representing abstract data can be
very invasive and portent. Despite being critical, users
were not indifferent and were proactive in envisioning and
proposing specific usage and considering the possible
social impact of an interface like Vital ? Morph. In
addition, even if the research on shape-changing interfaces
and data physicalization is still in an initial state, with our
study, we tried to contribute to this field by providing a
novel design metaphor inspired by a bio-inspired principle,
which marks a departure from previous examples that have
been based on common statistical ways of presenting data
through histograms and pie charts. The evaluation of the
system in a public space, such as a Media Art installation,
presented an alternative way to test novel systems and
observe reactions of first-time users. Through the development of Vital ? Morph, we hope to contribute to the
exploration of novel ways to present data and make remote
monitoring a social activity and a new form of data
domestication.

123

References
Barrass S (2016) Diagnosing blood pressure with acoustic sonification
singing bowls. Int J Hum Comput Stud 85(C):68–71. doi:10.
1016/j.ijhcs.2015.08.007
Bitterman N (2006) Technologies and solutions for data display in the
operating room. J Clin Monit Comput 20(3):165–173. doi:10.
1007/s10877-006-9017-0
Brown C, Hurst A (2012) VizTouch: automatically generated tactile
visualizations of coordinate spaces. In: Proceedings of of
TEI’12. doi:10.1145/2148131.2148160
Cermack M (2006) Monitoring and telemedicine support in remote
environments and in human space flight. Br J Anaesth
97(1):107–114. doi:10.1093/bja/ael132
Coelho M, Zigelbaum J (2011) Shape-changing interfaces. Pers Ubi
Comput 15(2):161–173. doi:10.1007/s00779-010-0311-y
Drews FA, Westenskow DR (2016) The right picture is worth a
thousand numbers: data displays in anesthesia. Hum Factors
48(1):59–71. doi:10.1518/001872006776412270
Dubus G, Bresin R (2014) A systematic review of mapping strategies
for the sonification of physical quantities. PLoS One 9:4. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0096018
Follmer S, Leithinger D, Olwal A, Hogge A, Ishii H (2013) inFORM:
dynamic physical affordances and constraints through shape and
object actuation. In: Proceedings of UIST’13. doi:10.1145/
2501988.2502032
Garnæs K, Grünberger O, Kjeldskov J, Skov MB (2007) Designing
technologies for presence-in-absence: illustrating the cube and
the picture frame. Pers Ubi Comput 11(5):403–408. doi:10.1007/
s00779-006-0072-9
Görges M, Staggers N (2008) Evaluations of physiological monitoring displays: a systematic review. J Clin Monit Comput. doi:10.
1007/s10877-007-9106-8
Greenberg S, Kuzuoka H (1999) Using digital but physical surrogates
to mediate awareness, communication and privacy in media
spaces. Pers Technol 3(4):182–198. doi:10.1007/BF01540552
Hardy J, Weichel C, Taher F, Vidler J, Alexander J (2015) ShapeClip:
towards rapid prototyping with shape-changing displays for
designers. In: Proceedings of CHI’15. doi:10.1145/2702123.
2702599
Heiner JM, Hudson SE, Tanaka K (1999) The information percolator:
ambient information display in a decorative object. In: Proceedings of UIST’99. doi:10.1145/320719.322595
Hemmert F, Löwe M, Wohlauf A, Joost G (2013) Animate mobiles:
proxemically reactive posture actuation as a means of relational
interaction with mobile phones. In: Proceedings of TEI’12.
doi:10.1145/2460625.2460669
Iaconesi S, Persico O (2016) La cura. Codice Edizioni
Ishii H, Ullmer B (1997) Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces
between people, bits and atoms. In: Proceedings of CHI’97.
doi:10.1145/258549.258715

AI & Soc
Ishii H, Lakatos D, Bonanni L, Labrune JB (2012) Radical atoms:
beyond tangible bits, toward transformable materials. Interactions 19(1):38–51. doi:10.1145/2065327.2065337
Iwata H (2005) Art and technology in interface devices. In:
Proceedings of VRST’05. doi:10.1145/1101616.1101617
Iwata H, Yano H, Nakaizumi F, Kawamura R (2001) Project
FEELEX: adding haptic surface to graphics. In: Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH’01. doi:10.1145/383259.383314
Iwata H, Yano H, Ono N (2005) Volflex. In: Emerging technologies
SIGGRAPH’05. doi:10.1145/1187297.1187329
Jansen Y, Dragicevic P, Fekete JD (2013) Evaluating the efficiency of
physical visualizations. In: Proceedings of CHI’13. doi:10.1145/
2470654.2481359
Jansen Y et al (2015) Opportunities and challenges for data
physicalization. In: Proceedings of CHI’15. doi:10.1145/
2702123.2702180
Janssen JH, Bailenson JN, Ijsselsteijn WA, Westerink JHDM (2010)
Intimate heartbeats: opportunities for affective communication
technology. IEEE Trans Affect Comput 1(2):72–80. doi:10.
1109/T-AFFC.2010.13
Johnson GJ, Ambrose PJ (2006) Neo-tribes: the power and potential
of online communities in health care. Commun ACM
49(1):107–113. doi:10.1145/1107458.1107463
Jovanon E, Starcevic D, Radivojevic V (2001) Perceptualization of
biomedical data. In: Akay M, Marsh A (eds) Information
technologies in medicine, vol I. Medical simulation and education. Wiley, New York, pp 189–204
Kaltenbrunner M, Jorda S, Geiger G, Alonso M (2006) The
reacTable*: a collaborative musical instrument. In: Proceedings
of IEEE WETICE’06. doi:10.1109/WETICE.2006.68
Korhonen I, Parkka J, Van Gils M (2003) Health monitoring in the
home of the future. IEEE Eng Med Biol 22(3):66–73. doi:10.
1109/MEMB.2003.1213628
Kusunoki DS, Aleksandra S, Zhang Z, Burd RS (2013) Understanding
visual attention of teams in dynamic medical settings through
vital signs monitor use. In: Proceedings of CSCW’13. doi:10.
1145/2441776.2441836
Leithinger D, Follmer S, Olwal A, Ishii H (2014) Physical telepresence: shape capture and display for embodied, computermediated remote collaboration. In: Proceedings of UIST’14.
doi:10.1145/2642918.2647377
Lindlbauer D, Grønbæk JE, Birk M, Halskov K, Alexa M, Müller J
(2016) Combining shape-changing interfaces and spatial augmented reality enables extended object appearance. In: Proceedings of CHI’16. doi:10.1145/2858036.2858457
Lynn G (1999) Animated form. Princeton Architectural Press, New
York
Maciejewski R, Choi S, Ebert DS, Tan HZ (2005) Multi-modal
perceptualization of volumetric data and its application to
molecular docking. In: Proceedings of world haptics conference.
doi:10.1109/WHC.2005.97
Mankoff J, Dey AK, Hsieh G, Kientz J, Lederer S, Ames M (2003)
Heuristic evaluation of ambient displays. In: Proceedings of
CHI’03. doi:10.1145/642611.642642
Manovich L (2008) Introduction to info-aesthetics. http://www.
mariabuszek.com/kcai/PoMoSeminar/Readings/
ManovichInfoAesthetics.pdf. Accessed 15 June 2017
McLanders M, Santomauro C, Tran J, Sanderson P (2014) Tactile
displays of pulse oximetry in integrated and separated configurations. In: Proceedings of HFES’14. doi:10.1177/
1541931214581158
Nafus D (2016) The domestication of data: why embracing digital
data means embracing bigger questions. In: Proceedings of
EPIC’16. doi:10.1111/1559-8918.2016.01097
Nakamichi D, Nishio S, Ishiguro H (2014) Training of telecommunication through teleoperated android ‘‘Telenoid’’ and its effect.

In: Proceedings of IEEE RO-MAN. doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2014.
6926396
Nangalia V, Prytherch DR, Smith GB (2010) Health technology
assessment review: remote monitoring of vital signs—current
status and future challenges. Crit Care 14(5):233. doi:10.1186/
cc9208
Pangaro G, Maynes-Aminzade D, Ishii H (2002) The actuated
workbench: computer-controlled actuation in tabletop tangible
interfaces. In: Proceedings of UIST’02. doi:10.1145/571985.
572011
Park YW, Park J, Nam TJ (2015) The trial of Bendi in a coffeehouse:
use of a shape-changing device for a tactile-visual phone
conversation. In: Proceedings of CHI’15. doi:10.1145/2702123.
2702326
Paul C (2015) From immateriality to neomateriality: art and the
conditions of digital materiality. In: Proceedings of ISEA 2015.
http://isea2015.org/proceeding/submissions/ISEA2015_
submission_154.pdf. Accessed 15 June 2017
Poupyrev I, Nashida T, Okabe M (2007) Actuation and tangible user
interfaces: the Vaucanson duck, robots, and shape displays. In:
Proceedings of TEI’07. doi:10.1145/1226969.1227012
Rasmussen MK, Pedersen EW, Petersen MG, Hornbæk K (2012)
Shape-changing interfaces: a review of the design space and
open research questions. In: Proceedings of CHI’12. doi:10.
1145/2207676.2207781
Schmitz M (2010) Concepts for life-like interactive objects. In:
Proceedings of TEI’11. doi:10.1145/1935701.1935732
Sekiguchi D, Inami M, Tachi S (2001) RobotPHONE: RUI for
interpersonal communication. In: Proceedings of CHI EA’01.
doi:10.1145/634067.634231
Slovák P, Janssen J, Fitzpatrick G (2012) Understanding heart rate
sharing: towards unpacking physiological space. In: Proceedings
of CHI’12. doi:10.1145/2207676.2208526
Sommerer C, Mignonneau L (2004) Mobile feelings-wireless communication of heartbeat and breath for mobile art. In: Proceedings of ICAT’04
Sugiyama Y, Hirai S (2006) Crawling and jumping by a deformable
robot. Int J Robot Res 25(5–6):603–620. doi:10.1177/
0278364906065386
Taher F et al (2017) Investigating the use of a dynamic physical bar
chart for data exploration and presentation. IEEE Trans Vis
Comput Gr 23(1):451–460. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598498
Thompson D (1992) On growth and form. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Van de Moere A (2008) Beyond the tyranny of the pixel: exploring
the physicality of information visualization. In: Proceedings of
IV’08. doi:10.1109/IV.2008.84
Vertegaal R, Poupyrev I (eds) (2008) Special issue: organic user
interfaces. Commun ACM 51(6)
Wakita A, Nakano A, Kobayashi N (2010) Programmable blobs: a
rheologic interface for organic shape design. In: Proceedings of
TEI’11. doi:10.1145/1935701.1935760
Weiser M (1991) The computer for the 21st century. Sci Am
265(3):94–104
Willett W, Jansen Y, Dragicevic P (2017) Embedded data representations. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Gr 23(1):461–470. doi:10.1109/
TVCG.2016.2598608
Wisneski C et al (1998) Ambient displays: turning architectural space
into an interface between people and digital information. In:
Streitz NA, Konomi S, Burkhardt HJ (eds) Cooperative buildings: integrating information, organization, and architecture.
Cobuild 1998, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 1370.
Springer, New York, pp 22–32
Yao L et al (2015) bioLogic: natto cells as nanoactuators for shape
changing interfaces. In: Proceedings of CHI’15. doi:10.1145/
2702123.2702611

123

