See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260699515

Can Physical Visualizations Support Analytical Tasks?
Conference Paper · October 2013

CITATIONS

READS

8

262

3 authors, including:
Simon Stusak
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich
12 PUBLICATIONS 97 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Data physicalization View project

Activity Based Computing (ABC) View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Simon Stusak on 17 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Can Physical Visualizations Support Analytical Tasks?
Simon Stusak

*

University of Munich (LMU)

Aurélien Tabard

†

University of Munich (LMU), Université Lyon 1

Andreas Butz

‡

University of Munich (LMU)

Figure 1: Two alternative physical visualizations, where each data case is represented by an engraved circle (a) or hole (b). The x axis
represents energy sources, the y axis countries and the z axis time (c). Each layer can be rotated about time axis.

ABSTRACT
While physical objects have been used to represent information
for a long time, physical visualizations only recently started to
attract attention from the InfoVis and HCI communities. In this
article we present our early experiments in designing physical
visualizations for supporting data analysis. Based on Amar’s
taxonomy of analytical tasks [1] we show that physical
visualizations can support a number of analytical activities but
that further research is needed to support all activities. Based on
our analysis, we propose promising directions for future research.

As a starting point for this exploration, we examine to which
extent PVs can support established analytical tasks of the InfoViz
domain. Based on Amar’s taxonomy of analytical tasks [1], we
discuss how these tasks are supported, and analyze the benefits
and drawbacks of PVs for each of these tasks.
2

CASE STUDY: LAYERED 2D PLOTS

As Jansen and Dragicevic showed with their curated lists 1,2 of
physical visualizations (PVs), artists and designers designed and
produced a wealth of physical representations of data. They are
well suited for playful exploration and stimulate curiosity and
awareness [2]. As a physical object that can be explored by all
senses, they are less prone to creating information overload and
distress [6]. Vande Moere [4] writes that the use of physical
materials as a communication medium allows for rich, cultural
connotations that evoke user fascination and engagement. He
argues that PVs can represent information in pleasant ways and
turn data analysis in an engaging and educational experience.
While these benefits are widely recognized, the analytic value of
physical visualizations remains to be explored [5].

To better understand their properties, we built and experimented
with PVs for a range of different datasets and in various form
factors. We cut our prototypes from transparent acrylic glass using
a laser cutter, which enables rapid prototyping with high precision
for creating accurate PVs.
Figure 1 a) and b) show two alternative PVs of a country
indicator dataset from Gapminder 3 similar to the datasets used by
Jansen et al. [3] (more images of different PVs can be found in
our flickr gallery 4). Data is plotted along 3 dimensions to provide
a compact representation. The PV consists of layered 2D plots, in
which the x axis represents energy sources, the y axis countries
and the z axis (layers) time (see Figure 1 c). Each data case is
represented by a hole in the respective layer. The width of this
hole represents the percentage of energy production from the
respective source by the respective country for a given year. This
PV is easy to interpret because it relies on a well-established 2D
visualization. Combined with a generic dataset, people were
readily able to interpret it. Moreover, it has the unique property of
being articulated: Layers can be rotated independently from each
other about the time axis. Although the PV we discuss here is only
a specific instance of a much larger design space, we use it as a
starting point to ground the discussion and offer promising
research directions 5.

*

3

Keywords: Tangible, Visualization, Physical visualization.
Index Terms: Computing methodologies → Visual analytics.
1

PHYSICAL VISUALIZATIONS

simon.stusak@ifi.lmu.de
aurelien.tabard@ifi.lmu.de
‡
andreas.butz@ifi.lmu.de
1
http://www.aviz.fr/Research/PassivePhysicalVisualizations
2
http://www.aviz.fr/Research/ActivePhysicalVisualizations
†

SUPPORTING ANALYTICAL TASKS

We reviewed several taxonomies of analytical task for
information visualization [1, 7, 8] and decided to use the
taxonomy by Amar et al. [1], because it focuses on user-centered
activities rather than on data representation,
3

http://www.gapminder.com
http://www.tinyurl.com/pv-stusak
5
See poster and Flickr gallery for more examples.
4

3.1 Task 1: Retrieve value
Finding the attribute values of specific cases in the data set is
fundamental and often constitutes a subtask of other analytical
tasks. Our PV allows locating, viewing and grasping all presented
values, and physical touch seems to be an essential cognitive aid
[3]. Retrieving exact values is also possible with the help of a
physical measuring tool, such as a vernier caliper, if the PV was
built in the appropriate scale.
3.2 Task 2: Filter
Filtering data based on various criteria is effective in getting
further insight into a limited subset of the data. Our visualization
allows filtering out specific years by rotating the corresponding
layers. It also affords focusing visually on one source/country
combination and its changes over time. More efficient filtering
methods could be used to highlight only specific elements.
3.3 Task 3: Compute Derived Value
Computing an aggregate numeric representation, such as the
average or the sum of specific attributes, is not supported by our
PV. It would require sophisticated mechanical construction or
digital augmentation, which are promising topics of investigation.
3.4 Task 4: Find Extremum
Finding attributes with maximum or minimum values with our
visualization is possible in various ways. Along the time axis, one
can easily spot the widest and narrowest layer by looking along
the hole across slices. In order to find the maximum value for a
given country and year, we need to slide out the respective layer
and compare all holes in a source row. This is more difficult
visually since the differences between the values can be small, but
touching or using rigid objects can also be used for comparisons.
3.5 Task 5: Sort
The PV we built supports sorting along the time axis by loosening
the screw and rearranging layers. A specific country/source
combination can, for example, be sorted in ascending order by
stacking layers according to increasing hole sizes. Sorting along
the country and source axes is not supported and would probably
require more complex mechanical arrangements, such as Bertin’s
original data matrices.
3.6 Task 6: Determine Range
The range of an attribute can be understood by looking at all its
unique values. Our visualization supports recognizing whether an
attribute’s range of values is wide or narrow by looking along the
respective axis. For example, it is easy to see that the electricity
production from nuclear sources in France has a wide range.
3.7 Task 7: Characterize Distribution
The characterization of the distribution of an attribute’s values
over the data set is limited. Our PV shows well where changes of
the values are taking place and whether these are frequent and
large or whether in contrast an attribute has many similar values.
However identifying distributions is limited by the static
arrangement of our physical visualization.
3.8 Task 8: Find Anomalies
Finding outliers or unexpected values is often a good basis for
further exploration of a data set. Our PV supports this task well by
providing a good overview of the entire data set. Since large
changes in size are perceived preattentively by the visual system,
outliers within a specific year can efficiently be spotted by a quick
look at the respective layer. As another example, there are small

View publication stats

changes in electricity production year by year in most countries. A
large shift can easily be recognized in the use of nuclear sources
by France or in the use of oil sources by Japan in the seventies.
3.9 Task 9: Cluster
Grouping similar items together is only possible along the time
axis, because within a layer, values cannot be rearranged. One can
focus on specific groups visually and by pointing physically but
clustering is quite limited. Dynamic visual highlights or physical
rearrangement could enable efficient clustering.
3.10 Task 10: Correlate
Determining useful relationships between the values of different
attributes is supported by our PV. For example, it is easy to
discover that every country, with the exclusion of Turkey is using
nuclear sources of electricity. The fact that Japan shifted their
electricity production from coal and hydroelectric to oil in the
seventies, can also easily be seen.
4

SUMMARY AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

As the analysis above shows, many analytic tasks can be
supported by PVs and they provide a particularly good overview
of the data set. Some tasks require the use of additional tools, e.g.,
for measuring; others require mechanical manipulation or even
disassembling and reassembling the PV. The fact that PVs are
three-dimensional objects, which can be visually and haptically
explored from all directions, provides a very efficient way to
combine visual and physical manipulation to focus on specific
dimensions or elements in the data set.
In order to further chart the design space of PVs, researchers can
start from established digital visualizations as in our example. A
promising field of exploration is the construction of mechanically
functioning visualizations, which allow dynamic exploration of a
data set. We have shown how a simple rotation axis can already
support the analytic tasks of filtering and sorting, and we believe
that other tasks, such as relating or the calculation of derived
values can be realized by more sophisticated mechanical
constructions, possibly involving non-rigid, elastic parts or even
liquids. We hope to provide a solid starting point for a more
systematic exploration of this fascinating design space.
REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

8.

R. Amar, J. Eagan, and J. Stasko. Low-level components of analytic
activity in information visualization. In InfoVis’05, 2005.
T. Hogan, E. Hornecker. In Touch with Space: Embodying Live
Data For Tangible Interaction. In Proceedings of TEI'13, pages 275278, 2013, ACM.
Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, and J.-D. Fekete. Evaluating the efficiency
of physical visualizations. In Proceedings of CHI'13, pages 2593–
2602, New York, NY, USA, 2013, ACM.
A. Vande Moere. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel: Exploring the
physicality of information visualization. In 12th International
Conference on Information Visualisation, IV'08, pages 469-474,
2008, IEEE.
A. Vande Moere and S. Patel. Analyzing the design approaches of
physical data sculptures in a design education context. In Visual
Information Communications International (VINCI’09), 2009.
R. S. Wurman. Information Anxiety, Doubleday, New York, 1989.
J. Yi, Y. Kang, J. Stasko, J. and J. Jacko. Toward a deeper
understanding of the role of interaction in information visualization.
In IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
13(6): 1224–1231, 2007.
M. X. Zhou and S. K. Feiner, Visual task characterization for
automated visual discourse synthesis. In Proceedings of CHI '98, ,
pages. 392-399, New York, NY, USA, 1998, ACM.

