Volume 35 (2016), Number 3

Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) 2016
K.-L. Ma, G. Santucci, and J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible
Tiles
Tiffany Wun1 , Jennifer Payne1 , Samuel Huron1,2 , and Sheelagh Carpendale1
1 University

2 I3-SES,

of Calgary, Canada
CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013, Paris, France

Abstract
Providing tools that make visualization authoring accessible to visualization non-experts is a major research challenge. Currently the most common approach to generating a visualization is to use software that quickly and automatically produces
visualizations based on templates. However, it has recently been suggested that constructing a visualization with tangible tiles
may be a more accessible method, especially for people without visualization expertise. There is still much to be learned about
the differences between these two visualization authoring practices. To better understand how people author visualizations in
these two conditions, we ran a qualitative study comparing the use of software to the use of tangible tiles, for the creation of
bar charts. Close observation of authoring activities showed how each of the following varied according to the tool used: 1)
sequences of action; 2) distribution of time spent on different aspects of the InfoVis pipeline; 3) pipeline task separation; and
4) freedom to manipulate visual variables. From these observations, we discuss the implications of the variations in activity
sequences, noting tool design considerations and pointing to future research questions.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
Presentation—User Interfaces

1. Introduction
The use of information visualization (InfoVis) is becoming more
common in everyday life. Today, we see visualizations such as bar
charts and network diagrams on television [HVF13, Dan08, DJ], in
newspapers [SH10], and on websites [PSM07]. Despite the prevalence of information visualization, research suggests it is difficult for novices to author their own visualizations [GTS10]. Creating accessible visualization authoring tools has been recognized
as a major challenge [LIRC12, HCL05, MJM∗ 06] in visualization
research. To inform the design of such tools, we need to better
understand how people create a visual mapping for a data set.
“Applying a visual mapping” is defined as assigning visual variables [Ber77, CM97] to parameters of a dataset. Different tools
are used in this task. Visual mappings can be done manually –
for example, by sketching on a napkin [CMvdP10], or with scissors and paper [DHM95]. They can be built with tangible representations [HJC14], coded in a programming language [BOH11],
or made automatically, using a software that provides ready-made
templates [Mic, Goo, Taba]. Each tool implies a different design paradigm and process. Currently, the most popular tool for
generating visualizations from templates is likely Microsoft Excel [Mic]. However, not only does Excel limit the possible visualizations to those preprogrammed as templates, but previous work
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John
Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

H.5.2 [Computer Graphics]: Information Interfaces and

has indicated that using Excel templates can be misleading for
novices [Su08]. Other research has shown that people do not seem
to encounter such limitations when authoring visualizations with
tangible tiles [HJC14]–using this method, people who had not studied visualization could author their own representations in a short
period of time, without additional help.
Both Excel and tangible tiles can be used to author visualizations, but these tools are different in several ways – Excel is digital
and semi-automatic, while tiles are tangible and entirely manual.
With this research, we use qualitative methods to uncover differences in the authoring procedures between these tools. We are interested in how people author visualizations using Microsoft Excel,
how authoring might be different when using tangible tiles, whether
a tool implies a specific process and what these processes might be,
and how the tool might impact the activity of visual mapping.
If we want to address the challenge of creating accessible visualization authoring tools, we need to better understand similarities
and differences between commonly-used tools, as well as the benefits and limitations of each. We present a qualitative study in which
we examine these differences. Our main goals are to investigate:
what differences exist between these tools during data manipulation and visual mapping tasks, when people perform each sub-task
during visualization authoring, how each tool impacts data manip-

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

ulation and visual mapping procedures, and which freedoms are
provided by each of these tools.
To analyze the processes within visualization authoring, we used
the InfoVis pipeline as presented by Jansen et al. [JD13]. We reveal
differences in both process and freedom of visual variable attribution. Our analysis makes the following contributions:
• an identification of different sequences of actions in visualization
authoring using each of the tools;
• a between-tool comparison of the distribution of time spent on
each of the tasks of the InfoVis pipeline;
• a schema of the interrelation between stages of the InfoVis pipeline according to tool used;
• a model of the correspondences between the authoring tasks, and
the freedom to manipulate visual variables; and
• suggestions, recommendations and implications for future research and design.

2. Motivation & Background
Information visualization authoring, which focuses on mapping between data and a visual encoding [Ber77], is a complex design task that can be performed with different types of
tools [GBTS13]. The community has produced important variety of
digital tools [VWVH∗ 07, Tabb, Taba] and toolkits [Fek04, BOH11]
for authoring visualizations, as well as several variations of model
of the process [CMS99, Car99, JD13]. Despite this work, there remains the challenge of providing accessible visualization authoring
tools to a wide audience [LIRC12, HCL05, MJM∗ 06]. To provide
context for this research, we discuss visualization literacy, template
editors, and tangible authoring and construction.

2.1. Visualization Literacy
Boy et al. [BRBF14] designed tests to assess visualization literacy, which they defined as “the ability to use well-established data
visualizations (e.g. line graphs) to handle information in an effective, efficient, and confident manner.” The tests are based on item
response theory, with three versions – one based on line graphs,
one based on bar charts, and a third based on scatter plots. These
tests use six tasks: minimum and maximum tasks involve finding
the lowest and highest values; variation tasks involve “detecting
a trend, similarities or discrepancies”; intersection tasks involve
finding a specific data point; average tasks involved estimating
the mean, and comparison tasks involved comparing either trends
or particular values. We used these tests as they provide efficient
means of assessing participant visualization comprehension.

2.2. Template Editor Software
Grammel et al. [GBTS13] reviewed visualization authoring software published within visualization and human-computer interaction venues. They noted six different visualization authoring approaches: visual builders, visualization spreadsheets, textual programming, visual dataflow programming, template editors, and
shelf configuration (similar to template editors, but with a greater

number of configurable options). Grammel et al. define the category of template editors as software in which a person “select[s] the data to visualize and then pick[s] a visual structure to represent it”. These tools include web services, such as:
ManyEyes [VWVH∗ 07], WolframAlpha [Wol], Google Chart Editor [Goo], and Tableau Public [Tabb]; and desktop applications like
Open Office [Apa], Tableau [Taba], Spotfire [Spo], and Microsoft
Excel [Mic]. This type of software is often composed of two views:
a view containing the spreadsheet with the data set, and a view containing the visualization. People enter data into the spreadsheet, select it, and generate a visualization by selecting a predefined visual
mapping template from a group of choices.
Template editors pose several challenges. By analyzing forum
posts, Chambers et al.’s [CS10] revealed a series of challenges
in using Microsoft Excel for authoring visualizations: a high frequency of problems in creating novel charts, i.e. charts not supported directly; difficulties in mapping goals to multiple features;
and difficulties with finding features, i.e. finding specific functionality through the Microsoft Excel interface. Other work examining
use of Excel suggests that certain features of the default chart types
limit peoples’ ability to comprehend data [Su08].
Grammel et al. [GTS10] also studied how information visualization novices author visualizations. Their participants did not interact directly with template editor software, but rather with an expert
operator using Tableau; participants had a task sheet containing the
data attributes, possible operations and a set of visualization samples. In authoring a visualization, participants encountered three
major barriers: (i) the selection of data attributes to explore; (ii)
the design of visual mappings; and (iii) the interpretation of the
visualizations. Later, Huron et al. [HCT∗ 14] studied novice visualization authoring, using tangible tiles, and did not observe these
same barriers. Though these two studies are not directly comparable, they point to potential differences between the two authoring
approaches, motivating us to explore such differences in the present
study.

2.3. Tangible Authoring and Construction
Though most visualizations are produced with software tools and
distributed via digital media, there are other practices used to generate representations – e.g. sketching on a napkin [CMvdP10], on
paper [WHC15], or on a whiteboard [WCR∗ 11]. In addition, there
are many diverse tools for creating representations using physical materials, as illustrated by the extensive list of tangible visualizations collected by Dragicevic and Jansen [DJ]. These include:
scissors and paper [DHM95], gumballs [DJ], yarn [DJ], LEGO
bricks [Hun08], and stones [Rei12].
Recently, Huron et al. [HCT∗ 14] described a common approach
to visualization creation, based on the process of construction. Using this method, information visualization novices were able to author a visualization of a simple data set in a short period of time
with relative ease [HJC14]. Thus different visualization authoring
tools have been created and explored, with varying levels of accessibility. Differences between visualization authoring with templatebased tools, like Microsoft Excel, and tangible approaches, like
construction using tiles, are not yet clear.
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

3. Study Design

3.2. Conditions and Tasks

In this study, we were interested in: i) understanding and exploring differences in peoples’ actions and sequences of actions using Excel and tiles, ii) understanding how people manipulate visual
and presentation variables [Ber77,Mac86] when creating bar charts
with each tool, and iii) exploring the impact of the tool on authoring procedures. We first describe our setup, conditions, datasets and
tests used, then outline our procedure.

The three tasks performed by participants were authoring, editing
and reading. Each task was done in each of two conditions – using
Microsoft Excel, and using tangible tiles.
Condition 1 – Microsoft Excel. In the Excel condition, participants sat at the digital table (Fig. 2) and performed the following
tasks:
• Authoring task: In the authoring task, participants were given
a dataset on an A4 sheet (Fig. 2, #5), and asked to “make a barchart” in Excel.
• Editing task: When the participant declared the task complete,
they were asked to verify their chart. If something was missing after verification, the experimenter recommended adding the
missing element(s).
• Reading task: The experimenter removed the dataset sheet from
the table, took a screenshot of the chart, and closed the Excel
window. The participant’s chart was then inserted into the reading test. The participant then completed the reading test.
Condition 2 – Tangible Tiles. In the tiles condition participants
were invited to sit in front of the tangible table (Fig. 2) and performed the following tasks:

Figure 1: Tiles in different colors. Two boxes of these tiles were
provided to participants.

3.1. Setup
The room held two working spaces, the tangible table and the digital table (see Fig. 2). The tangible table contained a workspace
inspired by Huron et al.’s’ tile-based study [HJC14]. It contained
A2 canvas paper, boxes of tiles (3), and a monitor (1) to display
questions for the reading test. We provided square tiles with the
same colours as the cells within the printed datasets: purple, white,
orange, and green (see Figure 1). At the tangible table, one camera captured the workspace from above, and the other captured participants’ gestures. The digital table contained a computer with
a monitor and a mouse, screen capturing software, and Microsoft
Excel. A camera was set up to capture participants’ gestures. Both
tables contained a sheet of A4 paper with a printed dataset.

#2

#1

• Authoring task: Participants were given a dataset in tabular format on A4 paper (Fig. 2), and asked to “make a bar chart”, using
tiles on the A2 canvas (Fig. 2, #3).
• Editing task: After the construction phase, participants were
given a pen, and asked to verify and annotate their chart. As in
the Excel condition, if something was missing after verification,
the experimenter recommended adding the missing element(s).
• Reading task: The experimenter removed the dataset sheet from
the tangible table. Mimicking the procedure with Excel, the experimenter used a box to hide the visualization as needed during
the reading test.

#5

#3
Figure 3: The two datasets for the authoring tasks.

#5

#4

Tangible Table

3.3. Tests and Dataset

#6
Digital Table

Figure 2: Room setup: 1) computer screen; 2) box to cover canvas
during tangible reading test; 3) boxes of tiles; 4) canvas for tiles
authoring; 5) dataset; and 6) computer used for Excel.
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

During the experiment, we used reading tests to assess: i) if participants knew what a bar chart was, and if they knew how to read one;
ii) if they understood the dataset provided; and iii) if they could
read the visualization they authored.
Primer and Reading tests. Based on Boy et al.’s visualization literacy test [BRBF14], we generated a primer test and a reading test.

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles
Actions
Loading data

The goal of the primer test was to determine if participants were
able to detect features in a dataset similar to the one used to author
the visualization. The goal of the reading test was to see if participants were able to detect the same data features from their authored
charts. These tests contained one question for each data feature. As
in the Boy et al. test, participants were given eleven seconds to answer each question.

Data transformation

Datasets. Our two datasets (Fig. 3) were based on those in the Visualization Literacy test [BRBF14], as these datasets were simple to
understand, and not associated with potentially familiar real-world
data. To simplify data processing for participants, we rounded values to the nearest ten.

Presentation
mapping

3.4. Participants
Seventeen people (12 female) participated in the study. All but one
were university students. Twelve participants were studying science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields, and the remaining five participants were medical and humanities students.
They ranged in age from 18 to 33, with a median age of 20. Participants were recruited via word-of-mouth, social media, and posters.
They were required to have normal colour vision, and not be visualization experts. 8/17 participants declared that they were at least
“somewhat familiar with creating visualizations in Excel”, while
none had used tangible tiles before.

3.5. Procedure
Participants filled out a consent form, demographic questionnaire,
then completed the bar chart visualization literacy test and primer
test. Participants then authored a bar chart in two conditions – using Microsoft Excel or tangible tiles. The order of conditions was
counter-balanced; half of participants first created a bar chart using tiles; the other half first created a bar chart using Excel. Next,
we asked participants to verify and annotate their chart. Following
this, participants completed the reading test and another visualization literacy test. Next, participants completed this sequence of activities in the other condition. After all conditions were completed,
participants were invited to share their thoughts in a semi-structured
interview. Participants received $20 for participation.

3.6. Data Collection

Visual mapping

Tool exploration

Requesting help
Coloring the bars
Correcting errors
Verifying

Definition
Transferring data from the provided format
to the visualization authoring tool.
Changing the data organization or structure,
involving such actions as ordering, sorting,
aggregating, etc.
“This transformation gives an initial visual
form to the processed data by mapping data
entities to visual marks, and data dimensions
to visual variables” [JD13]
“This transformation turns the abstract visual
form into a fully-specified visual presentation” [JD13]
Manipulating the tool without resulting in a
direct transformation to any part of the visual
representation.
Asking the experimenter for help.
Coloring the bars of the bar chart in Excel.
When a participant performs an action and
then reverses it a few seconds after.
Visual indication that the participant is verifying the visualization or the dataset.

Table 1: Actions identified and coded in the video data. The first
part of the table is from the InfoVis pipeline, while the second part
was identified through open coding.
• Interview: At the end of the study, we conducted a semistructured interview during which we asked participants to elaborate on the use of each tool. We asked them if they perceived
any difference in reading and understanding the visualization
with each tool, and if they perceived benefits in using one tool
or the other, which tool they preferred, and if they learned something during the process.

3.7. Data Analysis Method
We collected 265 minutes of video from the three cameras and
screen capture. To analyze the video, we used a qualitative approach based on open coding and axial coding, as described by
Creswell et al. [Cre12]. The coding of the video was performed
in three passes, using an iterative process and three coders. The
first pass involved open coding, allowing us to identify several categories of interest (see Table 1). For the second pass, we decided on
codes to compare activities, using terms from the InfoVis pipeline
by Jansen et al. [JD13] to relate our coding to previous models of
InfoVis authoring.

To analyze differences between the software and tiles conditions,
we gathered several types of data, as detailed below.
4. Results
• Video: We videoed the entire process in both conditions, with
the described viewing angles. Three video cameras were used
to record participants during the software authoring task, along
with screen-capturing software.
• Questionnaires: We gathered demographic information, and
had questionnaires about impressions after each condition.
• Visual Literacy Tests: We collected responses to visualization
literacy tests to discover to what degree participants were visually literate, and to see if this changed over the course of the
study.

Since we are primarily interested in comparing the process of authoring visualizations in the two conditions – Excel and tiles – our
study results focus on process details, which are primarily available
from the collected video data.
4.1. Observations on Conditions and Tasks
All participants were able to author and read a bar chart in both
conditions. Participants were faster using Excel than using tiles
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

Figure 4: Bar charts authored by participants with the tangible tiles and Microsoft Excel. A larger version is available on our supplementary
website at http://innovis.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/supplemental/Comparing-excel-tiles/.
(Figure 6). It took approximately eight and half minutes for participants to author and edit a visualization using tiles, and approximately seven minutes with Excel. Figure 5 illustrates the coded visualization authoring processes. Each line represents the sequence
of actions for a participant in a particular tool. The top half shows
visualization authoring using Excel, and the bottom half using tangible tiles. The highlighted colours show particular actions.
Figure 6 illustrates the time spent by action. While using tiles,
participants spent more time loading and transforming the data, performing visual and presentation mappings and verifying the visualization, in comparison to the amount of time they spent on these
actions when using Excel. In Excel, participants spent more time
exploring the tool and colouring the bars of the bar chart.
All participants scored very well on the initial visualization literacy test (9/17 had an initial perfect score); subsequent score fluctuations were negligible.
4.2. Comparing Common Actions
The actions of loading data, transforming data, creating or changing a visual mapping or presentation mapping occurred both when
using Excel and when using tiles; the distribution of time spent on
each of these actions is shown in Figure 6. However, these actions
were performed differently depending on the tool used. We discuss
how each of these actions was performed with each tool below.
Loading Data. Loading data in Excel involved copying the number from the provided paper dataset into the spreadsheet, using the
keyboard and mouse. Using tiles, this action corresponded to selecting tiles from the boxes, counting them and transporting them
to a position to the canvas. On average, participants spent 97 seconds performing this task with Excel, and 149 seconds performing
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

it with tiles. With Excel, all participants waited until the dataset
was fully loaded before performing any other actions. In the tiles
condition, all participants started doing other actions, such as visual mapping and presentation mapping, while they were loading
the data.
Transforming Data. In both conditions, the only transformation of
data we observed was reordering. These tasks were not suggested
to participants, but were done spontaneously. Two participants reordered with Excel, while six reordered with tiles. To reorder data
in Excel, one can use spreadsheet features that automatically sort
the data according to the selected specification. However, none of
our participants used such features. One processed the reordering
manually on the spreadsheet, using copy and paste, and the other
did this task mentally prior to first typing the data into the spreadsheet. These two participants sorted their charts by colour, and by
value, respectively. With tiles, all the participants used spatial rearrangement of tiles to reorder the data. Two ordered the bars by
colour alone, one by value alone, two by both colour and value,
and one (P12) participant kept half in their original order, while
sorting the second half by value.
Visual Mapping. In Excel, visual mapping was performed by all
participants using the same sequence of actions: selecting the cells
containing the data in the spreadsheet, opening a menu containing icons of the offered templates, then clicking the icon representing the desired chart. Sometimes a participant spent some time
choosing which chart they wanted. Sometimes they generated several charts before deciding on one. On average, participants spent
64 seconds doing these actions in Excel. Using tangible tiles, the
process was different. Participants transported tiles to the canvas
to load the data, and arranged them on the canvas to complete the
loading. Through these actions, they defined the mapping between

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

Figure 5: Actions over time for each participant, using Excel and using tiles, for authoring and editing tasks: loading data ( ), visual
mapping ( ), presentation mapping ( ), exploring the tool ( ), coloring the bar ( ) and verifying the visualization ( ).
the data dimension and the position of the tiles. For all participants,
this was done as they loaded the data, even if some participants
redefined the positions later. Participants spent an average of 160
seconds on this process with tiles.
Presentation Mapping. Presentation mapping refers to many different actions, such as labeling, providing a title, positioning the
chart, changing the aspect ratio, annotating, and specifying the
scale. With Excel, the chart is produced with a set of default presentation elements, such as axes ticks and a legend. Most participants
modified these. Some participants used the automatic features to do
tasks such as changing the label position for all the bars, while others did this manually. In Excel, participants spent an average of 43
seconds on these types of actions. With the tiles, some of these actions – such as changing the position of the chart or the aspect ratio
– were cumbersome or difficult. However, participants did create
axes, axes ticks, legends, annotations and labels. With tiles, participants spent an average of 209 seconds on these types of actions.
4.3. Condition 1 – Microsoft Excel.
Throughout this condition, participants followed a general sequence of actions, illustrated in Figure 5. This sequence was generally load data, visual mapping, presentation mapping, colour the
bars, sometimes followed by more presentation mapping. At various times during this sequence, we observed participants exploring
the tool. Only one participant (P6) did not adopt this same sequence
of actions, instead using a completely different process. This participant coloured spreadsheet cells to represent the data values, as
if they were constructing bars with tiles, but instead using cells as
tiles. Seven participants requested help with the tool. Two actions,
exploring the tool, and colouring the bars, were specific to Excel
condition and are described below.
Exploring the tool. ‘Exploring the tool’ encompassed activities
during which a participant was acting on the Excel interface without the action leading to any result – either on the spreadsheet, or on
the visualization. A sample exploration action is to open a menu,
go through the sub-menus, and not click anywhere. On average,
participants spent 92 seconds on this type of action, and the average number of these actions per participant was four. Such actions
were spread out over the authoring time sequence, visible in Figure 5. Only four participants explored the tool at the beginning of
the task, before loading the data; other participants explored at various other times during the authoring period.

Colouring the bars. The colour was a necessary and valuable piece
of information that provided the grouping of planets. Participants
added this information in Excel by colouring the bars of the bar
chart. To do so, they selected the bar in the chart by clicking on
it, and then opened a menu to choose the correct colour and validate the change. Participants repeated this action for each bar of the
chart. The total duration of this action was 92 seconds, on average.

4.4. Condition 2 – Tangible Tiles.
In this condition, all participants constructed a visualization without any requests for assistance specific to the tool. The only questions asked consisted of clarifications of the overall task.
The order of actions while using tiles was more repetitive and
cyclical than the authoring process in Excel. Often, actions were of
short duration compared to Excel, visible in Figure 5. Participants
still followed particular sequences. They loaded a portion of the
data, visually mapped it to bars, and repeated this until all data
was loaded and mapped. Sometimes, participants did presentation
mapping in between actions, while other times, they waited until
all bars were generated. Lastly, they verified the visualization.

4.5. Interviews
Participants were asked a series of questions to elicit their thoughts
and opinions during the study. While participants enjoyed both two
conditions, they generally preferred one or the other: tiles for its
simplicity and control over the tool, and Excel for the automation
of menial, repetitive tasks. 10/17 participants thought that building their chart in Excel was easy, and 13/17 stated using the tangible tiles was easy. 9/17 participants answered that authoring their
chart in Excel helped them to understand their chart better, while
7/17 participants thought that authoring with the tiles helped them
to understand their chart better. 7/17 participants said that reordering data based on values or colors made it easier for them to read
their chart. Similar to Huron et al.’s earlier study with tangible
tiles [HJC14], participants were asked “What did you manipulate
during the process of making your visualization?” in both questionnaires. In Excel, “the coloring of the bars” was the most popular
answer, while with the tangible tiles, “tiles/blocks” was the most
popular answer.
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

Figure 6: Distribution of time spent in average by all participants
by conditions. Vertical axis represents the time in milliseconds, horizontal axis the different participant’s actions. Times were computed from analysis of the video codings.
5. Discussion
We discuss findings in terms of the distribution of time across the
InfoVis pipeline operations, the interrelation between pipeline operations, and a schema for freedom of visual variable manipulation.
5.1. Distribution of Time Spent on Pipeline Operations
Our results illustrate clear differences in the order and sequence
of tasks (see Figure 5). Using Excel, participants tended follow
a linear pattern, while using tiles, participants tended to follow a
cyclical pattern that repeated for each bar within the bar chart. Using tiles, the majority of participants spent more time on each of
the pipeline operations than they did on these operations in Excel:
loading data (+52 seconds), transforming data (+12 seconds), visual mapping (+96 seconds), and presentation mapping operations
(+166 seconds). Using Excel, participants spent more time exploring how the tool works (+91 seconds), and on colouring bars of
the bar chart (+92 seconds). Some actions, such as colouring the
bars, are difficult to position in the InfoVis reference model, and
are not an option in the tiles condition. Selecting tiles of a particular colour could be considered part of the ‘loading data’ action,
as it adds new data to the representation. When coded this way,
participants were forty seconds quicker at loading coloured data
using tiles (149 seconds), than loading the numerical data (97 seconds) and colouring the bars (92 seconds) in Excel. Alternatively,
selecting tiles could instead be considered part of visual mapping,
as the participant assigns a visual variable to data by choosing tiles
of a particular colour, and picking a certain number of tiles. In this
case, participants spend approximately the same amount of time
performing visual mapping in tiles (160 seconds) as the combined
time for visual mapping (64 seconds) and colouring bars in Excel
(92 seconds).
The distribution of time across activities in the two conditions
suggests that Excel’s automation features are effective in reducing
the amount of time spent on visual mapping, and default presentation mapping tasks (96 and 166 seconds less than with tiles, respectively). However, doing a simple modification – such as adding
a data point and mapping it to the appropriate colour of bar – is
very time-consuming. The bar colouring action was particularly
time consuming in comparison to other actions in Excel (92 seconds, on average), taking almost as much time as loading data (97
seconds). Bar colouring also took place in a menu which often obscured the view of the chart, removing the action from the representation of the data. Thus, initial generation of the chart with Excel is
well-supported, but later editing -– including both alterations of the
visual mapping and addition of new elements -– is cumbersome.
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Similarly, the time spent exploring the tool in Excel suggests
that people have difficulties finding the features they need, echoing
previous work [CS10]. This is evident when participants want to
change default visual mapping options, such as the colour of the
bars. In Excel, there are fewer visual mapping operations than in
tiles, as the chart is created in one action. Tiles do not have automated features, making it necessary for participants to spend more
time on visual and presentation mapping tasks. These observations
raise questions about what a visual mapping tool should be – should
it automate the visual mapping, or should it be a tool that enforces
spending time on the visual mapping? This depends on an individual’s goal – if they want to generate a bar chart based on a predefined template, template editor software solves the problem. If
they want to work on transforming the visual representation of their
data, it may be useful to use other types of tools.
5.2. Operation Interrelations
Excel provides two different representations of the data: the spreadsheet, which is a symbolic representation (a matrix filled with numbers, letters, and sometimes formulas) and the generated bar chart,
which is a visual representation. The two representations allow a
clear separation between processed data and visual representation,
two elements of the InfoVis reference model. For instance, loading
and transforming data occur within the spreadsheet representation,
while modifying aspects of the visual and presentation mapping
occurs on the visual representation (i.e. the bar chart). However,
some of Excel’s features link these two views - for instance, if the
value of a cell is changed in the spreadsheet, the chart is updated
automatically.
Multiple (linked) representations do not exist in tangible tiles. As
a result, when using tiles, some operations in the pipeline are not
separable from others. A good example of interrelated operations
is the combination of actions involved in loading the data. Loading
data involves transporting a number of tokens (representing a certain value) to the canvas. When doing this loading, the work is being done directly on the visual representation. For this reason, participants must define some of the parameters of the visual mapping
at this point– for instance, how the tokens are positioned relative to
each other. They also have to define presentation mapping parameters – for instance, where the token is to be placed on the canvas.
These three transformations are separated in the InfoVis reference
model. However, in using tiles, they occur simultaneously as part of
the task of loading data – it is impossible to perform a data loading
action without also defining some aspects of visual and presentation mapping.
These observations allow us to define the interrelation principle as follows: operations are interrelated if one operation in the
pipeline specifies – either implicitly or explicitly – some parameters of one or more other operations. The interrelation between
operations is a characteristic of the authoring tool used. These inseparable operations are likely to influence the cognitive processes
of the author. For instance, while one loads data using tiles, the tool
enforces thinking about the spatial organization of visual elements
and visual mapping – this is not the case with Excel. Varying interrelation of tasks between authoring tools is one reason for the
observed differences in sequences of action.

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

loading
data
data
on paper

data
transformation

visual
mapping

visual
representation

processed
data

raw data

presentation
mapping
visual
presentation

rendering
physical
presentation

Figure 7: Schema representing interrelations between operations along the first part of the InfoVis pipelinel [JD13]. The lock icon represents
operations that cannot be separated; red lines represent linked operations with tiles, and blue lines linked operations within Excel.
Visual Operations
Visual Mapping

lig
ne
m
en
t

ec

An t Rat
gl io
A e

ha
rt
p

Le osit
g io
As en n
p d

en
t

Sh

ta
i

a
M pe
od
el
C

nm

Po
si
Le tion
ng
An th
g
Sl le
op
Ar e
ea
Vo
lu
De me
n
Co sit
nn y
Co ectio
lo n
Te ur
xt
u
Co re
n

Presentation M.

Excel
Tiles
Prog.

Figure 8: Freedom of the visual variables [Mac86] by tool (Excel,
Tiles, Programming). Filled circles represent a variable that can
be modified by the tool operator, transparent circles are setup by
default according the template chosen in Excel; the line illustrates
dependancies between variables.

In contrast, with tangible tiles, visual variables are restricted by
the types of tiles in use. In the present study, we choose to limit
the availability of tiles to one shape, one volume and eight colours.
This could be changed by simply adding more tokens types, as requested by one participant. Despite this choice, the tool is still less
restricted than Excel in that it allows participants to assign several
visual variables. In Figure 8 row 2, we can see that position and
length, amongst others, are free variables. The tangible aspect of
the tiles does limit some presentation variables – for instance, it
would be difficult to change the aspect ratio of the representation.
6. Future Considerations

These interrelated operations are beneficial in certain cases. For
instance, when a person changes the position of column of tiles
on the canvas, by acting on the spatial organization, the person is
also reorganizing the underlining data. Having multiple representations also has advantages in allowing one to focus on one aspect of
visualization creation at a time, such as changing the colours of individual bars (visual mapping/cell coloring) without replacing the
entire bar (as one would have to do in tiles in order to change the
colour of a bar).
5.3. Visual variable freedom
Visual mapping is defined by Card et al. as the process of mapping data to visual variables [CMS99]. Visual variables were initially defined by Bertin [Ber77], extended by Mackinlay [Mac86]
and later augmented to include physical variables for physical visualization [JDI∗ 15]. Since only one tool in the current study has
tangible aspects, we will focus our analysis on visual variables.
Our observations of participant behaviours reveals that visual
variable manipulation freedom changes according to the tool used.
In Excel, after loading the data, the participant uses menus to select one visualization template from several options. Selecting this
template automatically applies a predefined visual and presentation
mapping, specifying all the visual variables necessary to display
the visualization. After this transformation, the participant can manipulate only a restricted set of visual and presentation variables.
The form of the chart is limited by the template list provided by
the software, and each template predefines a set of visual variable
relations. The participant is only free to modify variables such as
the colour of the bars, the stroke, the aspect ratio and other presentation variables. Thus, this tool restricts the participants’ choice.
These options are shown in the first row of figure 8.

In this section, we discuss open research questions and implications
for design that have arisen from our study.
From our observations, we have distilled several implications for
design. It seems important to consider the way people find features
in template editor software and to look for ways to make this process more efficient. In addition, since edits to Excel template visual mapping take as much time as generating a chart, it could be
useful to consider designing interactions that simplify template visual mapping modifications. Visualization creation software may
benefit from exploration and utilization of interrelated actions. For
instance, when a participant colours a bar in Excel, they are in effect inputting data, and the software does not replicate this action
in spreadsheet view; this leads to a loss of information if the chart
view is closed. Creating more congruent relations between views
in template editor software could be useful.
Direct manipulation of the visual representation is something we
can learn from working with tiles. People generally performed data
transformations spontaneously using tiles – they directly manipulated visual elements that represent columns to reorder the dataset.
Analogous actions are not possible in Excel – one cannot drag and
drop columns in the bar chart to reorder them. Actions like this –
in which participants used the visual variables to manipulate and
transform the data – could be added to visualization creation software. It might also be possible to go beyond redesigning interactions, to designing a new class of digital tools that allow people
to create their own visual representation, while still offering some
automation.
This research has also led to several interesting future research
questions. Firstly, what parts of the InfoVis pipeline would be useful to automatize, which are best left as manual actions, and in what
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles

circumstances is this different? The interrelation principle enforces
different cognitive operations during visualization authoring – how
these influence the perception of the data and the visualization is
another open research question. Aside from Microsoft Excel and
tangible tiles, what are the interrelated operations with others tools,
for instance with drawing, or paper and scissors? How can we classify tools according to interrelated actions? Is it beneficial to design
tools which allow for certain actions to be either interrelated or separable (or even to switch between modes)? With different tools, different visual and physical variables are free. Can we classify tools
according to their types of freedoms? Does the automaticity of visual variable assignment influence people’s perception of the resultant visualization?
7. Limitations
In this section, we discuss the limitations in our comparison of Microsoft Excel and tangible tiles as visualization authoring tools. If
we aimed to explore the parameters of automaticity, constructive
vs. non-constructive, digital vs. tangible individually and separate,
more specific studies might have been more appropriate. However,
the aim of this investigation was to explore the whole tools, as they
are currently used.
Tangible vs. Digital, Constructive vs. Non-Constructive. Each
of the tools implies a different authoring paradigm – constructing,
for tangible tiles, and using, for Excel. This study cannot be considered a direct comparison of constructive and non-constructive
paradigms, as one tool is both constructive and tangible, and the
other is non-constructive and purely digital. For similar reasons,
this study cannot be considered a comparison of physical and digital visualization design tools. Future work could compare constructive digital tools with other non-constructive digital tools, constructive tangible tools with non-constructive tangible tools, and constructive digital with constructive physical tools, to explore differences in the authoring process that might be attributed to method of
creation (constructive vs. non-constructive) and physicality (digital
vs. tangible).
Manual vs. Automatic. This study is not a comparison of automatic and manual tools. Excel is a significantly more automated
tool than tangible tiles. For this reason, comparison between the
two tools in terms of total time taken, as well as time spent on particular actions might be deemed an unfair comparison. Automation
and manual actions have different benefits; future work could explore what portions of the visualization design process are best to
automate, and when it is best to provide both manual and automatic
options.
Type of Chart & Dataset. This study is a non-exhaustive examination of Microsoft Excel and tangible tiles in that the tools are only
used to generate one type of visualization, based on only one type
of dataset. Though the visualization and the dataset type were chosen because they are common, our results are not necessarily generalizable to the creation of all types of visualizations using these
tools, nor to the representation of all types of data. More complex
datasets and different types of visualizations might reveal nuances
of each tool that were not evident in the present investigation.
Readability. Major differences exist in reading setup between
c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

the tools: the tiles and Excel visualizations have different i) aspect
ratios, (ii) sizes, and (iii) orientations. Thus, reading test performance differences could be a result of some or all of these, as opposed to fundamental differences between the tools.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we present a study examining the differences between
two visualization authoring tools – tangible tiles and Microsoft Excel. We describe our observations of people using these tools to author, edit and read bar charts. These observations allow us to qualify
what differences exist between tools, when people performed different actions using each tool, and how each tool influences the authoring process. One might expect Excel to impose a certain workflow in the creation of a representation, and tangible tiles to give
the visualization creator more freedom in how they go about the
design and construction process. Our results offer the first empirical evidence this. We specifically observed how the distribution of
time spent, and sequence of actions in different operations from the
InfoVis pipeline is different according to the tool used. When using Microsoft Excel to generate visualizations, participants spent
more time exploring the tool. When using tangible tiles, participants spent more time on actions directly related to the data, such
as visual mapping operations. In addition, our observations indicated that some operations are linked, and that the linked operations are different between Excel and tiles; this operation linkage
may influence the cognitive processes of visualization authors.
9. Additional Materials
Additional materials are available online
//innovis.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/supplemental/
Comparing-excel-tiles/.

at

http:

10. Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), SMART Technologies, and the Alberta Innovates Technology Futures (AITF).
References
[Apa] A PACHE: Open Office, 2011. URL: https://www.openoffice.
org/. 2
[Ber77] B ERTIN J.:
La graphique et le traitement graphique de
l’information. Flammarion Paris, 1977. 1, 2, 3, 8
[BOH11] B OSTOCK M., O GIEVETSKY V., H EER J.: D3 data-driven documents. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on
17, 12 (2011), 2301–2309. 1, 2
[BRBF14] B OY J., R ENSINK R., B ERTINI E., F EKETE J.-D.: A principled way of assessing visualization literacy. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 20, 12 (2014), 1963–1972. 2, 3, 4
[Car99] C ARPENDALE M. S. T.: A framework for elastic presentation
space. PhD thesis, Simon Fraser University, 1999. 2
[CM97] C ARD S. K., M ACKINLAY J.: The structure of the information
visualization design space. In Information Visualization, 1997. Proceedings., IEEE Symposium on (1997), IEEE, pp. 92–99. 1
[CMS99] C ARD S. K., M ACKINLAY J. D., S HNEIDERMAN B.: Readings in information visualization: using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. 2, 8

Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale / Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles
[CMvdP10] C HAO W. O., M UNZNER T., VAN DE PANNE M.: Poster:
Rapid pen-centric authoring of improvisational visualizations with napkinvis. Posters Compendium InfoVis 2 (2010). 1, 2
[Cre12] C RESWELL J. W.: Qualitative inquiry and research design:
Choosing among five approaches. Sage, 2012. 4
[CS10] C HAMBERS C., S CAFFIDI C.: Struggling to excel: A field
study of challenges faced by spreadsheet users. In Visual Languages
and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 2010 IEEE Symposium on
(2010), IEEE, pp. 187–194. 2, 7
[Dan08] DANZIGER M.: Information visualization for the people. PhD
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2008. 1
[DHM95] D OUGLAS S., H UNDHAUSEN C., M C K EOWN D.: Toward
empirically-based software visualization languages. In Visual Languages, Proceedings., 11th IEEE International Symposium on (1995),
IEEE, pp. 342–349. 1, 2

[MJM∗ 06] M OORHEAD R., J OHNSON C., M UNZNER T., P FISTER H.,
R HEINGANS P., YOO T. S.: Visualization research challenges: A report
summary. Computing in Science and Engineering 8, 4 (2006), 66–73. 1,
2
[PSM07] P OUSMAN Z., S TASKO J. T., M ATEAS M.: Casual information visualization: Depictions of data in everyday life. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 13, 6 (2007), 1145–1152. 1
[Rei12] R EININGER H.: Hans Rosling’s shortest TED talk, 2012. URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNs-ziziPyo. 2
[SH10] S EGEL E., H EER J.: Narrative visualization: Telling stories with
data. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 16, 6
(2010), 1139–1148. 1
[Spo]
2

S POT F IRE: SpotFire, 2013. URL: http://www.spotfire.com/.

[DJ] D RAGICEVIC P., JANSEN Y.: List of Physical Visualizations, 2012.
URL: http://dataphys.org/list. 1, 2

[Su08] S U Y.-S.: It’s easy to produce chartjunk using Microsoft Excel
2007 but hard to make good graphs. Computational Statistics & Data
Analysis 52, 10 (2008), 4594–4601. 1, 2

[Fek04] F EKETE J.-D.: The infovis toolkit. In Information Visualization,
2004. INFOVIS 2004. IEEE Symposium on (2004), IEEE, pp. 167–174.
2

[Taba] TABLEAU:
Tableau,
tableausoftware.com/. 1, 2

[GBTS13] G RAMMEL L., B ENNETT C., T ORY M., S TOREY M. A.: A
Survey of Visualization Construction User Interfaces. In EuroVis-Short
Papers (2013), The Eurographics Association, pp. 19–23. 2
[Goo] G OOGLE: Google Chart Editor, 2013.
google.com/drive/answer/63824. 1, 2

https://support.

[GTS10] G RAMMEL L., T ORY M., S TOREY M. A.: How information
visualization novices construct visualizations. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 16, 6 (2010), 943–952. 1, 2
[HCL05] H EER J., C ARD S. K., L ANDAY J. A.: Prefuse: a toolkit for
interactive information visualization. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems (2005), ACM, pp. 421–
430. 1, 2
[HCT∗ 14] H URON S., C ARPENDALE S., T HUDT A., TANG A.,
M AUERER M.: Constructive visualization. In Proceedings of the 2014
conference on Designing interactive systems (2014), ACM, pp. 433–442.
2

2013.

[Tabb] TABLEAU:
Tableau Public, 2014.
tableausoftware.com/public. 2

URL:

http://www.

URL: http://www.

[VWVH∗ 07] V IEGAS F. B., WATTENBERG M., VAN H AM F., K RISS
J., M C K EON M.: Many Eyes: a site for visualization at internet scale. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 13, 6 (2007),
1121–1128. 2
[WCR∗ 11] WALNY J., C ARPENDALE S., R ICHE N., V ENOLIA G.,
FAWCETT P.: Visual thinking in action: Visualizations as used on whiteboards. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 17,
12 (2011), 2508–2517. 2
[WHC15] WALNY J., H URON S., C ARPENDALE S.: An Exploratory
Study of Data Sketching for Visual Representation. Computer Graphics
Forum (2015), 231–240. 2
[Wol] W OLFRAM R ESEARCH: Wolfram Alpha, 2015. URL: http://
www.wolframalpha.com/. 2

[HJC14] H URON S., JANSEN Y., C ARPENDALE S.: Constructing visual
representations: Investigating the use of tangible tokens. Visualization
and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 20, 12 (2014), 2102–
2111. 1, 2, 3, 6
[Hun08] H UNGER , M ICHAEL: On LEGO Powered Time-Tracking;
My Daily Column, 2008. URL: http://jexp.de/blog/2008/08/
on-lego-powered-time-tracking-my-daily-column/. 2
[HVF13] H URON S., V UILLEMOT R., F EKETE J.-D.: Bubble-TV: Live
visual feedback for social tv broadcast. In ACM CHI 2013 Workshop:
Exploring and enhancing the user experience for television (2013). 1
[JD13] JANSEN Y., D RAGICEVIC P.: An interaction model for visualizations beyond the desktop. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on 19, 12 (2013), 2396–2405. 2, 4, 8
[JDI∗ 15] JANSEN Y., D RAGICEVIC P., I SENBERG P., A LEXANDER J.,
K ARNIK A., K ILDAL J., S UBRAMANIAN S., H ORNBÆK K.: Opportunities and challenges for data physicalization. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(2015), ACM, pp. 3227–3236. 8
[LIRC12] L EE B., I SENBERG P., R ICHE N. H., C ARPENDALE S.: Beyond mouse and keyboard: Expanding design considerations for information visualization interactions. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Transactions on 18, 12 (2012), 2689–2698. 1, 2
[Mac86] M ACKINLAY J.: Automating the design of graphical presentations of relational information. ACM Transactions On Graphics (Tog) 5,
2 (1986), 110–141. 3, 8
[Mic] M ICROSOFT: Microsoft Excel, 2015. URL: https://products.
office.com/en-CA/excel. 1, 2

c 2016 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2016 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

