Self-Reflection and Personal Physicalization Construction
Alice Thudt1
Uta Hinrichs2
Samuel Huron3
1 InnoVis Group
2 SACHI Group
University of Calgary, Canada
University of St Andrews, UK

Sheelagh Carpendale1
3 Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris-Saclay, France

alice.thudt@googlemail.com uh3@st-andrews.ac.uk samuel.huron@telecom-paristech.fr sheelagh@ucalgary.ca
ABSTRACT

Self-reflection is a central goal of personal informatics systems,
and constructing visualizations from physical tokens has been
found to help people reflect on data. However, so far, constructive physicalization has only been studied in lab environments
with provided datasets. Our qualitative study investigates the
construction of personal physicalizations in people’s domestic
environments over 2–4 weeks. It contributes an understanding
of (1) the process of creating personal physicalizations, (2) the
types of personal insights facilitated, (3) the integration of selfreflection in the physicalization process, and (4) its benefits
and challenges for self-reflection. We found that in constructive personal physicalization, data collection, construction and
self-reflections are deeply intertwined. This extends previous
models of visualization creation and data-driven self-reflection.
We outline how benefits such as reflection through manual construction, personalization, and presence in everyday life can
be transferred to a wider set of digital and physical systems.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous
Author Keywords

Self-Reflection; Constructive Visualization; Personal Data
INTRODUCTION

“Active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in light of the grounds
that support it, and the further conclusions to which it
tends, constitutes reflective thought.” Dewey, 1910 [14]
As Dewey’s definition highlights, reflection requires active
engagement with our experiences. Personal data can be used
as “grounds that support” such reflections to draw conclusions for our actions, thoughts, character, and, ultimately,
foster self-knowledge. Supporting data-driven reflection has
become an active research topic in HCI and information visualization (e.g., [3, 22, 32]) with a focus on goals, processes,
favourable conditions, insight types, and levels of reflection,
as well as the development of tools for collecting and presenting personal data—often in form of visualizations—to
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04. . . $15.00
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173728

foster reflection. But even millennia before these research
fields existed, people have created and reflected on physical
representations of data (i.e., physicalizations [28]; see [15]),
to track, for example, menstrual cycles [52], or personal accomplishments [20]. The manual construction of personal
visualizations using simple physical building blocks persists
until today (e.g., Hunger’s Lego time tracking physicalization [23]). The constructive visualization paradigm [25] is
promising for supporting self-reflection as it fosters active
engagement with the data and draws on simple and familiar
actions and materials [25], rather than requiring learning and
navigating interface components [51]. However, so far, the
manual construction of visualizations has not been studied in
a personal context. Previous empirical studies were conducted
in lab environments with test datasets.
To address this gap, we have investigated how people manually construct physicalizations of their own data and within
their personal environment over a 2–4 week period. Our main
goal is to gain an in-depth understanding of how constructive
physicalization approaches are applied in personal contexts.
Our analysis reveals details about how people approached the
creation of their physicalizations and suggests that this process
allows for personal reflections that are deeply intertwined with
the manual construction. From this first exploration of physicalization construction in a personal context, we contribute (1)
a description of the construction process, (2) a list of reflection
types it facilitated, (3) a description how these reflections are
embedded into manual construction, and (4) a discussion of
benefits and challenges of physical visualization construction
for reflection. These contributions lead to design considerations for transferring our findings on physical visualization
construction to a wider set of digital and physical tools for
personal reflection, and outline avenues for future research.
RELATED WORK

Our work draws on research on self-reflection in personal
informatics and visualizations, and visualization construction.
Understanding Data-Driven Reflection

Despite active research interest in supporting and understanding reflection, the term is often not clearly defined [3]. In
personal informatics, reflection is commonly discussed as
goal-oriented [3]. A body of work thus describes purposes of
self-reflection, most prominently self-improvement [10, 17,
32, 41, 49]. Reflection is further described as part of the personal data tracking process either as dedicated step [32] or as
part of capturing and examining data [10]. Li et al. identify
questions driving reflection during discovery and maintenance

phases [33]. Others explore how to create favourable conditions for reflection, for example, allowing time to reflect [2, 18,
21], and supporting iterative inquiry [2]. Cox et al. distinguish
two types of “digital epiphanies”, resulting in acceptance or
behaviour change [13]. A survey of professionals’ reflective
practices, describes descriptive, dialogic, transformative, and
critical reflection levels [18]. However, meta-reviews of selftracking [29] and reflective informatics research [3] found that
studies often do not explicitly focus on insights and reflective
processes or provide evidence of “reflective thought beyond
simply looking at the data” [3]. Our work considers “reflection
itself as a meaningful activity” [3] and differentiates reflection
types and processes in a personal visualization context.
Studying Self-Reflection Using Personal Visualizations

Reflection is often supported through personal visualizations
(see [22] for an overview). Particularly visualization systems
aiming at self-understanding are predominantly evaluated in
controlled experiments measuring accuracy and efficiency [22].
Such studies cannot reveal complex reflective thoughts beyond
examining data [47]. Choe et al. include “self-reflections”
by considering contextual information, confirmation, or contradiction of existing knowledge, and future predictions in
their characterization of Quantified Selfers’ visualization insights [8]. In a following think-aloud study using a custom
visualization tool, fewer high-level reflections were reported,
possibly due to the tool or the lab study [9]. We extend this previous work by describing how self-reflection can be supported
by and embedded in manual construction.
Constructing Visualizations & Physicalizations

A growing body of work explores how to involve people in
visualization creation through familiar [19] and novel digital
tools [38], sketching [48], digital fabrication [40, 45], manual
construction [25, 51], and crafting [40]. This act of active
creation can be beneficial for reflection. For example, Walny
et al. report a spectrum of data-related insights from sketching
data [48]. Nissen and Bowers describe how involving people
in digital fabrication and crafting of personal data can support
meaning making and reflection [40]. We explore the manual
construction of personal data from familiar physical materials. Constructive visualization (i.e., manually assembling
tokens to represent data) has been described as a dynamic,
expressive, and simple way to construct physical and digital representations [25]. Studies investigating this paradigm
found that it allows novices to author visualizations [25] and
spend more time on data-related actions compared to using
Excel [51]. The constructive paradigm has been adopted by
digital visualization tools such as iVoLVER [39] which shows
potential to support more “thoughtful exploration” compared
to more automated tools [38]. Researchers who used constructive approaches in workshops [16, 24, 26] and classroom
settings [50] further highlight the pedagogic potential of the
approach. While 3D printing of personal physicalizations with
pre-defined data mappings has been found to be a promising
approach [30, 44], the manual construction of one’s own mappings has only been studied in lab environments with provided
datasets. Our work explores the constructive paradigm using
physical materials in a real-world personal setting, focusing
specifically on its potential for supporting self-reflection.

STUDY METHODOLOGY

Our qualitative study aimed at exploring constructive physicalizations of personal data in the realistic setting of people’s
own homes over a time period of at least two weeks.
Study Design

Our methodology combined a diary study method [6] with
semi-structured interviews and was organized into four parts:
an introductory workshop; a pre-interview; a physicalization
activity of at least two weeks at home; and an exit interview.1
Introductory Group Workshop & Pre-Interview

We conducted a workshop to familiarize participants with the
basics of working with data and of mapping data to visual
variables. After a brief presentation, participants tried the process in groups of 2–3. Each group received a fictional dataset
about a personal topic (e.g., expenses, dreams, headaches) as
well as a variety of physical materials (e.g., plasticine, beads).
To simulate an ongoing physicalization activity, groups were
asked to decide on their physical mapping only based on the
data summary and then reveal the dataset line-by-line after
representing each data point. Groups then discussed each others’ physicalizations. Last, participants received a look-up
sheet1 summarizing the presentation to take home and were
asked to think about (1) a personal topic and their motivation
for exploring it, (2) data they wanted to capture, (3) a visual
mapping using the provided physical materials, and (4) a way
to integrate the construction process into their daily routines.
We discussed these topics in individual pre-interviews, scheduled at the convenience of participants. They also received
a construction kit containing beads (8 colours, 3 sizes), plasticine and pins (8 colours each), tape (10 colours), thread (2
colours), labels, measuring tape, and a foam core board.1
Diary Method: Constructing Visualizations at Home

Next, participants constructed data about their chosen topic at
home for a self-selected time period of at least 2 weeks. We
asked participants to follow a continuous process, where each
new activity constituting a data point is integrated into the
evolving physicalization. We further encouraged them to document their process with photos and notes in diary entries sent
to us via email. Each participant received five email check-ins
during their physicalization activity containing questions about
potential challenges or adjustments to their process, discoveries and reflections, habits formed around the physicalization,
and an invitation to share free-form thoughts and pictures.
Exit Interview

After the physicalization activity we met participants in their
homes for a final interview and documented how the physicalization was integrated into their personal space. During the
1–2 hour semi-structured interview we covered participants’
reflections and insights from the physicalization activity, integration with routines, environment, and social context, and
their thoughts on the physical approach to personal logging.
In preparation, we tailored interview questions within these
topic areas to each participant based on their dairy updates.
Participants

We aimed to recruit participants with diverse backgrounds
and an interest in personal data. We distributed recruitment
1 See

supplemental material (pp.2–9) for study materials.

posters on campus, in coffee shops, and community centres
and through mailing lists and meetup groups. Nine participants took part in our study (3 male, 6 female; aged 18–65).
Six were university students (e.g., Design, Musicology, and
Education), a stay-at-home mom, a teacher, and a college
instructor. Their visualization expertise ranged from no experience (n=1), occasional encounters in media, work or personal
use (n=5), regular use for work or personal interest (n=2),
to regular visualization creation of in a professional context
(n=1). Seven participants had experience with personal data
tracking using automated (n=2) or manual apps (n=4) or paper
(n=1), typically to gain awareness of personal patterns (n=4).
Data Collection & Analysis

We video-recorded all interviews, collected participants’ diary entries and picture updates and photographed the final
physicalization in its domestic context. Subsequently, all exit
interviews were transcribed and the transcripts as well as participant diaries were coded by two researchers following a
thematic analysis approach [4]. We applied two coding passes.
In the first open coding pass, we coded participant statements
following the main interview themes. The specific codes from
the first pass were collaboratively analyzed to extract construction process steps, types of personal reflections and insights as
well as benefits and challenges of the physicalization process.
We then applied a focussed axial coding step [11] to relate
the types of reflections to the construction process steps. We
describe our findings in the following three sections.
CONSTRUCTIVE PHYSICALIZATION PROJECTS

Despite the time commitment of 5 to 25 minutes per day, all
9 participants engaged in the physicalization activity throughout their self-selected time period (14 to 28 days). Two participants have continued their physicalization process since.
Chosen themes included activities and hobbies (n=5), health
and fitness (n=3), mood (n=2), and work (n=1). Goals for
tracking included gaining a better awareness of personal patterns (n=8), developing strategies to improve one’s life (n=5),
self-motivation (n=4), and reminiscing (n=1). Some participants specified several goals and themes. Participants collected numerical, categorical, temporal and location data. Six
participants included data about their subjective experience.
Participants kept partial (n=5), full (n=2), or no (n=2) external
specifications of their mapping, either in form of legends in the
physicalization (n=4) or separate from it (n=3). The choices
of construction materials varied as well: 8 participants used
the beads to represent their data; 3 used plasticine, 2 used
pins and string, and 1 used tape in their physical mapping.
Materials were also used as aids (e.g. to hold tokens in place),
for labeling, and decorative purposes. The created physicalizations take various forms (for an overview see Figure 1):
5 participants used the provided foam core board as a base,
3 integrated their physicalizations directly into the domestic
environment, and 1 created a wearable physicalization.
We describe each project focussing on (1) the motivation, (2)
the collected data and physical mapping, and (3) the main
benefits and insights people gained.2
2 See

supplemental material (pp.10–18) for additional pictures

[P1] Workouts: P1 wanted to create a “sport autobiography”
of his workouts that adequately “portrays” this central part
of his identity. He also aimed to use the physicalization to
develop a workout routine that contributes to his well-being
while facilitating his ambitious fitness goals. He used colours
to represent his physical activities (e.g., running, swimming,
biking; see Fig. 1.1). Intensities of workouts are marked
with tape around the board, and durations are shown using
beads next to the tape and in the centre of the board. The
physicalization is laid out as a “race track” with start and
finish flags, emphasizing P1’s “story”. He found that the
manual construction fostered “deep thinking". The process
paired with his knowledge on athletic training let P1 develop
a workout routine that allowed his body to recover.
[P2] Hip Pain: P2 is experiencing severe hip pain and wanted
create a physicalization to see how his pain progresses. His
physicalization shows the intensity of the pain in the number of
medium sized beads, the “walkability” in their colour, and his
pain killer intake in the small beads for each day grouped on a
piece of plasticine (see Fig. 1.2). After 5 days, P2 noticed that
his pain is “very complex” and, thus, decided to add “difficulty
of changing position” as an additional attribute (shown by the
colour of a large bead) to more fully describe his experience.
He stated that, while he did not use his physicalization directly
in communication with a medical specialist, it helped him to
become more aware of the intricacies of his condition.
[P3] Mood: P3 wanted to understand how being active affects
her mood and to create a decorative artefact that would positively affect her mood, because “it looks nice”. P3 created
a bead ornament daily to decorate branches in her kitchen
(see Fig. 1.3). She logged her data in 4-hour intervals, each
represented by one bead with size showing P3’s mood and
colour showing whether she was active, social, or home. Taking materials with her while on-the-go allowed P3 to log her
mood throughout the day. This ongoing constructing helped
P3 gain an awareness of her mood which positively affected
her reflections in the evening when hanging her day’s ornament into the branches: “Instead of going to bed thinking ‘it’s
been a bad day’, you can see: ok, I’ve put a lot of big beads on,
so it must have been a good day.” Contrary to P3’s expectation
her activities did not have “any influence on the mood”.
[P4] Nutrition and Bowel Movements: P4 wanted to explore how her 4-year-old daughter’s (P4c) nutrition affects
the child’s bowel movements. The project was motivated by
P4’s worry that her daughter’s diet might lead to constipation. The physical approach allowed P4 and her daughter to
engage in the process together. Their shared physicalization
shows an overview of food servings (each shown with one
bead coloured according to the type of food) across 27 days
(marked with tape; see Fig. 1.4). The plasticine sculptures
created by P4c mark days when she had bowel movements.
This activity “motivated” P4c to go to the bathroom more
frequently, thus, mitigating the previous problem of constipation. The physicalization reduced P4’s worries of having
to eliminate specific food from P4c’s diet. P4 describes their
collaborative construction as a “bonding experience” and as a
way for P4c to become “more body aware”.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Figure 1. Overview of all 9 participants’ projects. The topics are: (1) workouts, (2) hip pain, (3) mood, (4) nutrition and bowel movements, (5)
distractions during writing, (6) enjoyment of activities, (7) meditation, (8) places visited in a new city, (9) recipes for homemade care products.

[P5] Distractions during Writing: P5 created wearable physicalizations of distractions during her thesis writing. She anticipated that wearing them would motivate her to be focussed.
She made one bracelet/necklace for each work day with one
stitch representing 3 minutes of work and beads showing times
of distraction (see Fig. 1.5). Work sessions are separated with
purple beads. The colour of other beads shows whether tasks
for each session were accomplished. Because “the process
has not been as motivational as expected”, P5 started using
the physicalization “in an explorative way”. This approach
helped her develop more productive work strategies. The process further encouraged her to become “more compassionate”
with her own ways of working.

Fig. 1.7). The aggregated duration of all meditations per day
is marked with a thread connecting consecutive days. Handrolled plasticine balls on the pins represent P7’s experienced
quality of meditations (size) and the type of guidance (colour).
The sensual aspect of the plasticine fit with P7’s mindfulness
practice and allowed him to apply a “continuous” scale for
meditation quality. He describes the visualization as a way to
“keep [him] honest”, reward for his consistency, and prop to
have an “open dialogue” with friends about meditation.

[P6] Activities and Enjoyment: P6 wanted to understand
“where [her] time goes”. She logged 6 different activities (e.g.,
meditation, work, etc.) shown as different coloured beads,
each representing one hour, with their size showing enjoyment
(see Fig. 1.6). Aesthetic appeal was a central goal in P6’s
design and is reflected in the circular layout of strings that
each represent one day. P6 sometimes experienced the manual construction process as “tedious”. However, the invested
effort made her feel “attached” to her physicalization.

[P8] Places Visited in a New City: P8 designed her physicalization as a memento of her time in the city to which she just
moved. She marked visited places with pins on two maps (city
overview and detail of downtown; see Fig. 1.8). Pin colours
represent types of places (e.g., restaurant or bar) and beads on
the pins show how much she enjoyed each place (colour), and
how long she stayed (size). P8 looked back on her day during
construction, deciding: “If I like the place and I want to keep
that memory in my life.” She describes herself as “very neutral”
and found rating her enjoyment difficult. For her, the process
was “helpful” in becoming more decisive. It motivated her
“to go out more”, but also to adjust her expectations: “I will at
least do something new. One thing per day.”

[P7] Meditation: P7 created his physicalization to monitor
and improve the “consistency” of his meditations and to understand how forms of guidance affect the “quality” of meditations. He represented meditation duration in the horizontal position of pins on a board in his meditation space (see

[P9] Recipes for DIY Care Products: P9 creates her own
recipes for care products and wanted to use her physicalization
to keep track of her recipes. She mapped different colours of
beads to ingredients and sizes to their ratios in each recipe
(see Fig. 1.9). P9 used the beads to experiment and plan out

DESIGN PHASE

data design
contextual knowledge

mapping design

data summary

realization

physical mapping

adjustments

DATA CONSTRUCTION PHASE
steps repeated for each new activity

separate log

experience of
new activity
(

prepared
tokens

separate logging )

preparing tokens

logging

representation

physicalization

integration
combined logging &
representation

Figure 2. The physicalization process starts with a design phase. During
the subsequent data construction phase, new data is repeatedly gathered
and represented, either in separate or combined steps.

the recipe and to “actually play with them a bit more [...],
sort of like Lego and just build [the recipe].” P9 used the
finished “bead recipe” for making the product and to “label”
its container. The physical construction has since replaced her
previous approach of planning recipes on paper: “Translating
from the written to the quantity is for me a bit more challenging
than from the physical bead to the quantity of the thing.”
CONSTRUCTION PROCESS

As instructed by our study protocol, participants did not start
their projects from pre-existing data but followed what we
call an ongoing “data construction process” where data was
collected and integrated into an evolving physicalization.
Design Phase

All projects began with a Design Phase (see Fig. 2, top). Participants first decided on their topic and goals based on contextual
knowledge about their lives. Then they created a data summary, including decisions on data attributes, possible categorizations, scales, and possible value ranges of attributes. Next,
participants developed a physical mapping, deciding on how to
map their data to the physical materials. Participants also considered how daily data construction can fit into their everyday
routines. During the design activity participants took notes,
sketched, or experimented with the physical materials. With
their designs in mind, participants engaged in physicalization—
the Data Construction Phase. Some participants adjusted their
designs as part of their ongoing construction process.
Data Construction Phase

From our interview analysis we identified a series of steps
(see Fig. 2, bottom) that were repeated during the construction
phase as new experiences are physicalized:
Separate Logging: Three participants logged data digitally or
on paper in a textual, numerical or visual format, separate from
their physicalization. One participant kept a complete separate
log, and two relied on partial logs or occasional memory aids.
Six participants did not create a separate log.
Preparing Tokens: To transform new data into physical form,
participants selected tokens (e.g., by picking a pin of a certain colour), created intermediate constructs (e.g., by counting
and arranging beads), or created customized tokens from malleable materials (e.g., by forming a plasticine ball of a certain
size). Participants prepared tokens based on their separate logs
(see previous step) or translated aspects of their experiences

directly into physical tokens (most often; n=7). This step
resulted in one or more tokens describing the new data.
Integration: Next, participants integrated the prepared tokens
into their evolving physicalization, sometimes spatially arranging them to represent further attributes of their experience
(n=7). Values of these additional attributes were read from
their log (n=3) or derived directly from experience (n=4). This
step resulted in a physicalization that integrates the new data
point in context of previously added data points.
While the individual steps described above are conceptually
separate, they were intertwined by participants into a fluid
process. For instance, only two participants created an intermediate construct of prepared tokens, temporally separate
from its integration into the physicalization. Further, while
data capture and representation are commonly discussed as
separate in self-tracking [32], we only observed this clear separation in the case of one participant. All other participants
combined tracking and representation of some or all data attributes in their construction process. To illustrate the different
phases and steps, we describe processes of P5 and P7.
P5 followed an elaborate process. During writing she took
notes on distraction times and captured writing tasks in a time
tracking app (→separate logging). She then translated this
data into a visual pattern for creating a bracelet on paper. Next,
she counted the beads for the physicalization, while deciding
whether tasks were accomplished (→preparing tokens). To
craft the bracelet she followed her pattern using the prepared
beads (→integration). Before completing the activity after 3
weeks, P5 pinned all bracelets to a foam core board, and added
information about working hours from her app.
P7 transformed his meditation experience directly into physical form. After each meditation he formed a plasticine ball,
intuitively adjusting its size to match the felt quality of his
focus (→preparing tokens). He then pinned the ball to a board
in a position showing duration and date (→integration).
REFLECTION AS PART OF CONSTRUCTION

Next we describe the reported types of reflections, how they
were embedded in the physical construction process, and the
benefits and challenges of this process for self-reflection.
Types of Personal Reflections and Insights

The insights participants gained from their reflections ranged
in levels of depth from simple data readings to contemplations
of personal values and attitudes.
Reflection on Data: Insights directly derived from the data.
All participants made such observations that included the identification of patterns, trends, correlations and relationships of
attributes within the data (cf. [8]). For example, P7 recognized
a trend suggesting personal growth: “You see, I start off doing
a couple [of meditations], and they were not very good, and
then eventually they improved.” Reflections on data allowed
participants to answer personal questions. For example, P4 realized that eating larger amounts of vegetables was correlated
with the occurrence of her daughter’s bowel movements.
Reflection on Context: Interpretations of data in the light of
one’s personal context and pre-existing expectations (cf. “selfreflection” [8]). These reflections helped participants to derive

personal meaning and implications from the physicalization
and confirm or correct previous expectations: “I expected that
I would go downtown a lot. But, actually, I didn’t go downtown that much. Only near my house.” [P8]. Furthermore, the
physicalization activity enabled predictions. For example, P4
was able to predict her daughter’s bowel movements based
on food intake as visible in the physicalization. The activity
further triggered new questions to explore. For example, P5
became curious about the impact of working with other people
on her concentration. Physicalizations also triggered reminiscing about events related to the shown data: “Just doing this
and seeing this [physicalization] makes me remember those
days. So, it can be like a journal.” [P8; places visited].
Reflection on Action: Motivation and development of actionable strategies. Considering both data and contextual knowledge, participants developed strategies to achieve personal
goals or improve their well-being: “Sometimes I take two
aspirin pills at a time, and I found that, I can still achieve a
similar effect just by taking one pill, and that would be much
better for my stomach.” [P2; hip pain]. The awareness of her
writing progress encouraged P5 to test new strategies she developed through the physicalization activity: “I changed my
writing process a lot thanks to this visualization. I realized
that working in longer sessions was more beneficial for my
writing process. I could have these longer threads with no
beads [times without distractions]. So the day after that, you
can see they are getting longer and longer.” [P5; distractions].
For some, the physicalization activity directly influenced behaviours in a positive way. For example, the enjoyable process
motivated P4c to go to the bathroom more frequently: “The
tracking affected her behaviour, because she was motivated,
so she tried to go more. Making these sculptures at night
before bed was really fun for her. She’d look forward to it all
day.” [P4]. The prospect of capturing accomplishments also
influenced participants actions. For example, P8 visited more
places, to be able to add new pins to her map: “If someone
asked me, I never rejected [laughs]. I’d go everywhere!”. The
tangible manifestation of personal habits also helped participants stick to their personal goals: “It was almost keeping
me accountable to myself. It’s very hard to hide to yourself
that you’re not meditating as much.” [P7]. Sometimes, however, reflections on actions led to negative emotional responses
such as “stress” [P8] or pressure, although some highlighted
associated motivational effects. Some participants expressed
disappointment when reflecting on their actions. For instance,
P6 “regretted”, lost opportunities for activities: “I definitely
had time to do that. Like, why didn’t I do that?” Still, she
experienced these critical reflections as “useful” to understand
“why [she] made these decisions” [P6; activity enjoyment]. Few
days into her project P8 reported: “I realized my life is kind
of boring. I did not do anything new but just everyday routine.”
However, P8’s experience changed over time: “in retrospect I
did many things for the 2 or 3 weeks.”
Reflection on Values: Contemplation of one’s character, values and attitudes. Participants related data readings to their
values and motives: “[Points to small red beads] Here, I
didn’t enjoy the times with my friends. But it’s good that I
did it, because we haven’t talked in so long. So it’s good that

I spent that time cultivating the relationship.” [P6; activity
enjoyment]. For some participants such reflections changed
previous attitudes. For instance, it helped P8 become more decisive in considering which activities bring her joy: “I usually
I don’t decide it that much. But for this [physicalization activity] I tried to decide my enjoyment. So, actually, it was helpful
and good for me!". For P2 [hip pain], the activity increased
his confidence in communicating his condition: “Sometimes
when you go see a doctor, you just feel there’s something
wrong [but] you can’t really express it. I feel that, because I
keep track of this, I’m a bit more in tune with my pain, and so
I have more confidence when I explain what’s going on.” Interestingly, four participants who initially intended to improve
their behaviour, were able accept some habits through the
project. For instance, P5 [distractions] reconsidered her high
expectations:“Be a little bit more compassionate about your
writing, but not too much [laughs]. Finding that balance was
a good discovery. And not feeling guilty.” She further states:
“You should not be so strict in evaluating what is success.”
To summarize, the four reflection types described above led
to (1) insights directly from the data, (2) interpretations of the
data in the light of personal context and pre-existing beliefs,
(3) motivation and development of actionable strategies, and
(4) contemplations of personal values and attitudes. It is important to note that some reported reflections on context, and
most reflections on actions and values can be characterized as
“transformative” [18], thus leading to changes in actions and
personal beliefs.
Embedding Reflection in the Construction Process

To gather considerations for supporting reflection, we analyzed how reflection types were related to process steps of the
physicalization activity (see Fig. 3).
Reflection during Design Phase. Reflection already started
during the design phase, when participants had not yet collected data. Participants engaged in three types of reflections
to inform their design. Reflections on →context included considering preexisting knowledge of habitual patterns as well
as formulating personally relevant questions and expectations
to arrive a suitable data schema and assembly model. For
instance, to categorize times spent in different places, P8 considered her personal patterns: “Usually I don’t stay at a place
more than 3 hours. That’s usually my maximum. And when
I go shopping for groceries, usually it’s short, but still more
than 30 minutes. So I chose less than an hour [minimum
unit].” Reflections on →actions are manifested in participants’
considerations of how their activities will influence the appearance of their physicalizations. For example, P5 [distractions]
decided to adjust her writing habits to produce bracelets of similar lengths. →Values that participants describe as important
parts of their identities were also considered when designing
the physicalizations: “[Making] these DIY things is part of my
identity, and I reflect that [in the physicalization]. [...] This is
who I am, it’s not just what I use. I think that having this ambiguity of the beads as opposed to a label that says ‘deodorant’
or ‘toothpaste’ is much more appealing to me.” [P9; recipes].
Other participants carefully considered, for example, colour
choices in their visual mappings to prevent the physicalization

REFLECTION TYPES
observed in each stage
Subject
D ata

Reflection

P H Y S I C A L I Z AT I O N C R E AT I O N

D A T A C O N S T R U C T I O N repeated for each new data point

DESIGN

PHYSICAL CONSTRUCTION
Preparing
Tokens

Identifying Patterns & Correlations

C o n t e x t Interpretations Beyond-the-Data
A ctions

Developing Strategies & Motivation

V alues

Contemplating Character & Attitudes

C

A V

C A V
( Separate Logging )

D

C

Integration into
Physicalization

A V

D

C A V

COMPLETE
PHYSICALIZ AT I O N
D C A V

D ATA C O L L E C T I O N
PERSONAL EXPERIENCES

Figure 3. An integrated process of personal physicalization creation and self-reflection. Circles show which types of insights participants described
during each step of the physicalization creation.

from triggering negative feelings of guilt or pressure. For example, P5 [distractions] deliberately chose colours that “were
both equally energetic and free of judgement. It’s not like red
and green.” P1’s colour choices express his excitement about
his athletic “life-style”.
Reflection during Separate Logging. While only three participants created data logs separate from the physicalization,
we found evidence that this separate logging step can enable
reflection (cf. [7, 10]). For example, when jotting down her
writing distractions, P5 noticed that although she kept getting
distracted, her work was still productive (→context). Separate
logging further enabled reflection-in-action [42]: It provided
P5 with a “clear picture of the status in that moment”, allowing her to directly adjust her strategies: “You lose your
focus, then you work 9 minutes, then you lose your focus for
about 6 minutes [...] and then I mean: just stop working! And
that’s when I stopped the session.” For P5, categorizing new
data points even led to considerations of personal →values,
for example, to decide what constitutes work and what is a
distraction. In contrast, the other two participants created separate logs mainly as a memory aid. For example, P2 [hip pain]
used it to keep track of his pain killer intake during the day.
However, he stated that adding to the log did not spur direct
insights: “I would just log and then I don’t even try to reflect
on it, because it’s just like a bunch of words. [...] I wouldn’t
even bother reading a part in the past basically.”
Reflection when Preparing Tokens. Participants comments
reveal that the token preparation step encouraged all four types
of reflections on →data, →context, →actions, and →values.
They particularly highlighted this process as reflective, when
representing qualitative aspects of their experience (e.g., mood
or pain) through physical attributes by selecting and customizing tokens. For instance, choosing a bead colour encouraged
P8 to reflect on her enjoyment: “I just tried to decide: If I
like the place, so I think I was happy, and I want to keep that
memory in my life, that feeling, then I put the red [bead].”
The timing of the token preparation also affected reflection.
Four participants prepared tokens directly after each activity.
For instance, P7 found this to be important to assess the quality
of his experience accurately: “When I do the two [meditations]
I found that I would have to stop, make the plasticine ball and
then continue. Because if I waited too long I wouldn’t be able
to accurately assess the quality.” Similarly, P3 experienced
selecting beads to show her mood multiple times during the
day as beneficial: “This way I reflected at different times
during the day so I didn’t have to do a whole day at one time.”

In contrast, the five participants who prepared tokens only
once a day, appreciated this dedicated moment to reflect. For
instance, for P6 counting beads became “a reflection at the end
of the day.” Similarly, preparing tokens in the evening helped
P4 to gain awareness of her daughter’s nutrition: “Having that
information, going through it all at one place and one time.
I think, just the mental act of counting out the beads [...] it
internalizes it in a way and kind of manifests or makes it real.”
In addition to retrospective reflections, manipulating tokens
also supported future planning. For instance, P9 used tokens to
creatively explore new recipes: “The thing I really liked about
turning these things into physical objects was that I could kind
of play with them a bit more. I just took beads and I put them
together sort of like Lego and just build [the recipe]”. In this
way, she generated new recipes that she tried later.
Reflection during Integration. Participants also reported all
four types of reflections when integrating prepared tokens into
their physicalization. This activity brought new data points
into the context of previous ones which particularly facilitated
reflections on →data patterns and trends. For instance, P2
described how this integration step made him “more aware”
of his pain: “With this [physicalization] I’m forced to review,
and because the format is much more visual, I need to reflect every single time when I put something on it.” Some
participants described this activity as a reflective ritual that
fostered reminiscing, reconciling new insights with expectations (→context), adjusting personal strategies (→action), and
considering new insights in the light of personal attitudes and
→values. P3 [mood] described how, when hanging her bead
ornament into the branch (Fig. 1.3), reflections on her day reminded her of her accomplishments: “The ritual, like putting
it up on the branch in the evening, it also was something to
remember and [...] work through the day! [...] I think, it’s
triggering this sense of accomplishment.”
Reflection using the Completed Physicalization. Participants also used the complete physicalization for all four types
of reflections. P5, for example, described how looking at all
“data bracelets” together helped her revisit previous insights
and make new discoveries. While two participants decided
to continue their physicalization activity after the study, the
majority ended the process after the agreed period for different
reasons. Sometimes a personally meaningful timeframe was
coming to an end: “I would like to do it for 2–3 more days,
because I think it’s the time I need to finish what I started
[a thesis chapter], and that would be like a nice moment to
stop.” [P5; distractions]. P2 [hip pain] stated that after de-

voting intense attention to his condition for the 2 weeks, he
wanted to “keep [his] mind off the pain a bit”. Others stated
that they had answered their questions, and felt that continuing would not yield additional discoveries, unless they would
refocus their attention to other aspects or topics: “I was gonna
do it again, but I will probably make a bigger change, like
only track one thing specifically. I feel like we got out of this
method what we could possibly get out of it.” [P4; nutrition].
Benefits and Challenges of Constructing Personal Data

Our findings suggest that the physicalization activity provided
our participants ample opportunities for self-reflection. Participants described benefits and challenges of the creation
process related to reflection regarding personalization, physicality, manual effort, and presence of the physicalization in
everyday life, sometimes drawing comparisons to digital tools.
Personalization. Participants personalized their physicalizations in expressive ways, visible in the great variety in the
resulting physicalizations (see Fig. 1). The process allowed
focussing on personally meaningful aspects. For example, in
contrast to her previous practice of pinning visited places in
Google maps, P8 captured enjoyment and duration of visits,
which for her indicated the importance of places in her life.
The physical materials further enabled personal mappings especially of qualitative aspects of experiences. For instance,
the plasticine allowed P7 to express the quality of his meditations on a continuous scale: “Having to bin stuff would have
detracted from it. I wanted those continuous changes. I’d
take one [piece of plasticine] and roll a ball. And then you
can look at the ball and be like ’does this feel right?’ and
then add and subtract more.” P5 compared the freedom of the
physicalization process to using her time tracking app: while
the app reliably shows how much time she spends writing,
it does not help her reflect on “uncountable” aspects related
to the quality of her experience, for example, the level of focus. This flexibility further allowed P9 to add data attributes
to more fully describe his hip pain after becoming aware of
its complexity. Also, in contrast to digital analysis tools, the
personal involvement in the representation creation seems to
support internalization of gained insights: “On the app I really
rely on the apps’ analysis versus my own. I really couldn’t
tell you what I’d eaten in a month, if I didn’t go back and see
their little bar charts, because I’d forgotten. Whereas on this
[physicalization], I felt like I was starting to have an intuitive
understanding. Because [in the app] I’m not physically building it each day. That way I have to rely on the analysis that it
provides back to me. So I wouldn’t be able to tell you anything
[shrugs].” [P4; nutrition].
Physicality. The physicality of the materials was experienced
as both a benefit and a challenge. More than half of our participants explicitly described the working with the materials as
“fun” or “enjoyable”. Participants described how it supported
a continuity of their physical experience. For example, P7
[meditation] found that the sensuality of plasticine fit into his
mindfulness practice. Comparing it to digital apps, he states:
“Just knowing I have to pull out my phone and navigate the
interface... I think, I wouldn’t be as eager to [engage with
it].” P2 [hip pain] felt that the physicality of materials made it
easier to capture his physical pain: “I don’t imagine doing this

on an app. I think it’s less natural, because the pain that I feel
is physical, and doing it on an app is digital, and so it might be
a bit harder to relate the feeling.” However, participants also
commented on physical constraints getting in the way of their
representations’ accuracy and, consequently, their reflections.
P8 [places visited] regretted having to omit repeated visits
from her physicalization, because of the limited space for pins
on her map. P1 [workouts] had to skew his representation to
work within the physical constraints of the board: “I couldn’t
really stretch that [tape] out to show it was 40Ks. The board
it’s on just wouldn’t allow that.”
Manual Effort. The physical construction process requires
manual effort which can make it more time consuming than
digital logging: “The advantage of Google [maps] is, I can
pin when I’m there. It has GPS, and I can just pin more
easily.” [P8; places visited]. However, participants emphasized
that this manual effort benefited reflection: “It takes more time
than just clicking on the phone. But during that time I can
think. So everyday I think, and I see what I did before. So it
also helps me remember.” [P8]. The manual construction also
helped participants to internalize an awareness of their topic:
“The manipulatives definitely helped internalizing it over time.
[It made] the analysis more intuitive. I think, that had to
do with physically building it.” [P4; nutrition]. Participants’
statements reveal a feeling of pride and attachment to their
physicalizations which promoted an ongoing engagement with
the corresponding data. The manual effort involved seemed to
contribute to this: “You are more attached because you spend
more time on it. [...; Digital logging is] practical just to see
what happened, but this one is more... you invest so much time
and energy thinking about it, so it has more value.” [P6].
Although token-based physicalizations can be freely manipulated and explored, participants found this to be too tedious.
Because of this, P8 [places visited], for example, refrained
from changing her map to focus on the part of the city where
she spent most of her time, when she realized that this area
was starting to get cluttered. P4 [nutrition] wanted to explore
how certain foods affected her daughter’s bowel movements,
but manually re-sorting and filtering the beads was just “too
much work”. Only P9 used the tokens in an exploratory way
to iterate on recipes: “I had the beads, so I could just put them
out, and I could swap them and be like: Do I want it this way
or this way?” However, none of our participants applied major changes to completed physicalizations parts or performed
interactive operations such as aggregation or filtering.
Presence in Everyday Life. The physicality enabled the integration of created artefacts into participants’ personal spaces
where they could serendipitously spark reflection. The daily
presence of the object became a reminder to log and reflect
and facilitated continuous awareness: “If I’m putting things
in an app, they tend to just disappear in a way. [The physical
presence] makes it more solid and concrete in your consciousness.” [P4]. It also created opportunities for social interaction
and shared reflection: “I think for [my husband] it was also
fun to follow it. [If it was in an app] he probably wouldn’t
notice it at all. Then he would have to actively ask. Here,
we could just talk about it, without actually thinking about
talking about it. It’s just something that happened because it

was there. It triggered the conversations. [...] Instead of me
telling him what I’ve been doing, he actually asked, because
he saw what different colours I used.” [P3; mood]. Similarly,
P4’s whole family got involved in a shared analysis of the
physicalization: “Sometimes it got left on the coffee table for
a few days and then the boys would be sitting there trying to
figure out if there is a pattern or what does it mean.” However, presence in everyday life also made the physicalizations
vulnerable to damage: “The cat was really curious, and I’m
afraid she would start clawing at it just for fun.” [P1].
DISCUSSION

We discuss our findings in the light of previous work on reflection, personal visualization, and visualization creation.
The Impact of Physical Manipulation on Reflection

Previous work has highlighted the importance of considering how personal data tracking is “enmeshed with everyday
life” [41]. Our study findings show constructive physicalization as one way of achieving this. Its flexibility and customizability enabled participants to tailor personal physicalizations
to their unique values and concerns, personal context and
environment, allowing data collection and representation to
become part of their everyday routines. Extending work that
highlights the importance of agency and personalization for
mindful self-reflection in clinical contexts [1, 43], we found
that allowing participants to design their own personal data
categories, visual mappings, tracking processes, and physicalization form factors can benefit reflection for diverse personal
scenarios. By constructing visual mappings in line with their
individual mental models of the data, participants engaged
in an activity that can be related to an “expressive mode of
learning” [36, 37]. The constructive physicalization approach
proposed in this paper, can be connected to previous work that
describes physical externalization of cognitive processes and
incremental construction as beneficial for thinking and comprehension [31]. The active involvement in the construction of
personalized visual representations, may thus have contributed
to the intuitive understanding of the data and the meaningful
personal observations reported by our participants.
We found that previously described advantages of manual
tracking—greater control, flexibility, awareness [7] and “intimacy with data” [10]—were reinforced through the manual
approach to both data logging and representation. The constructive approach also provided greater expressive freedom
compared to pre-defined digital or 3D printed visualizations
(cf. [30, 44]). However, it limited the accuracy and granularity of participants’ representations and participants found the
effortful process to pose barriers for fine-grained long-term
logging (cf. [7, 12]). Further, physical long-term tracking usually requires disassembling physicalizations to reuse materials,
which, in turn, destroys the captured data. Despite of these
limitations, our results show that exploring a topic even for
a short time can yield important personal insights (cf. “Dear
Data” [35, 34]). This suggests that physical construction is
particularly suitable for short-term curiosity-driven, or “documentary” tracking [41], for creating mementos and personal
artifacts (e.g., P3,P8,P9; cf. [40, 46]), or for long-term tracking
of less frequent events (e.g., P7).

From Low-Level to High-Level Reflections

We have identified four personal reflection types as part of
the physicalization activities: identification of patterns and
relationships in the data, interpretations in the light of one’s
personal context and assumptions, development of strategies
and motivation that affect one’s actions, and contemplations
of one’s values, attitudes, or character. While instances of
the former three types of reflections have been reported previously [8, 9], reflections on personal values are rarely discussed.
Furthermore, the lack of an agreed upon framework that helps
to systematically categorize reflections in personal informatics,
complicates the comparison of reflections across studies. We
contribute a detailed and nuanced description of reflections,
and how these are facilitated through physical materials as a
means to represent personal data. Interestingly, “transformative reflections” [18] (i.e., the reconsideration of beliefs and
habits), rarely reported in studies with digital prototypes [9],
were common among our study participants, possibly due to
our physical approach to constructive visualization (see previous section). In line with previous work [18], we found that
“lower” level reflections on data and context were often a prerequisite for deeper reflections: For example, recognizing data
patterns (e.g., the frequency of new places visited by P8) led
to contemplations of their deeper meaning for personal values
(e.g., adjustments to P8’s perception of what constitutes an
exciting life). These findings inform further research on how
to facilitate reflection at different levels with both physical and
digital personal visualizations.
Relating Reflection Types to Process Steps

Our findings show that self-reflection is deeply intertwined in
the process of physical data construction. This is in contrast to
foundational models of both personal informatics systems [32]
and visualization creation [5, 27] that describe the formation
of insights as a separate and deliberate step after the data is
transformed into a visual or physical format. Previous work
further describes process steps [10, 32] and reflection types [9]
separately. Our findings relate individual steps of the physicalization process (i.e., design, optional separate logging,
preparing tokens, integration, and examining the completed
physicalization) to the types of reflections they facilitated. All
steps are accompanied by most types of reflections except
for the design stage and separate data logging (see Fig. 3).
The lack of reported reflections on data in the design phase
is explained by the lack of data at this stage. During separate
logging, the mostly textual or numerical form may have hampered identifying patterns and correlations. Also only three
participants incorporated this step into their process. During
all other steps—preparing tokens, integration, and examining the complete physicalization—participants mentioned all
four types of reflections. It is possible that their active involvement (c.f. [40]) in all steps of physicalization creation
promoted these diverse reflections throughout the process. If
self-reflection is considered a primary goal, we suggest facilitating a more active role for people in the design of personal
visualizations, than is commonly assumed in digital tools.
Direct Visualization of Experience

In particular when representing experiential or qualitative
aspects (e.g., pain, mood, meditation quality), participants

formed direct associations between their experience and the
visual and physical properties representing them. For instance,
P2 used colours instead of abstract categories to capture aspects of his pain in his separate log. Only two participants
created a log or legend that fully described their mapping of
physical attributes to numerical or textual data; seven captured
aspects of their experience directly through the physicalization,
intuitively mapping them to physical properties without an explicit prior data categorization. While this transformation of
an experience directly into a visual and physical manifestation
makes it more difficult to create alternate representation later
on, it seems that the continuity of the process allowed participants to directly reflect on the quality of their experience,
rather than creating an additional layer of abstraction in form
of numerical or categorical characterizations of the collected
data. This is further supported by the fact that, similarly to
previous observations in the context of physicalization construction [25], our participants spoke interchangeably about
the physical tokens and the data these represented. The fact
that most of our participants’ data was implicit in their physicalization process is remarkable, considering that existing
models of visualization and physicalization creation [5, 27]
as well as self-tracking processes [32] assume an explicit
data manifestation created in a separate data collection step.
Our findings highlight direct visualization of experience as an
under-explored type of visualization process and an interesting
avenue for future research.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DESIGN & FUTURE RESEARCH

As a first exploration of personal physicalization construction,
our findings provide considerations for designing physical and
digital personal visualization tools and highlight interesting
questions for future research.
Exploring Visualizations as Data Input. Constructive physicalization allows to directly manifest experiences, making data
implicit in the process. Participants described this activity as
reflective. Selecting and customizing tokens allowed expressing qualitative experiences that cannot be easily quantified
or categorized, and the integration of tokens let participants
directly see new data in context which facilitated immediate
reflections. Similarly, future tools could explore visualizations
as a means to directly capture qualitative attributes, for example, by manipulating position, size or colour of visual marks,
or by sketching data into a visual representation.
Visualizations as Generative Planning Tools. Constructive
physicalization is not only a way to reflect on past experiences, but it can also facilitate imagining and planning future
activities in a hands-on way. One participant described manipulating tokens as a visual means to generate new recipes.
Similarly, Hunger used lego blocks to plan his work schedule [23]. Exploring the potential of visualization for reflection
on future activities (e.g., for budgeting, time management, and
creative tasks) is an exciting avenue for future research.
Towards Stand-alone Personal Data Construction Kits.
Some participants expressed interest in sharing the personal
physicalization approach and construction kit with others. Exploring stand-alone data construction kits (see e.g., [16, 34])
could help to support activities without in-person guidance

that we provided through an introductory workshop and email
check-ins. Participants stated that the emails did not affect
their reflection, but found the workshop and look-up sheet
helpful for their visualization design. However, future empirical research is needed to better understand how cues for
reflection can be best provided in form of such stand-alone
personal data construction kits.
Expressive Freedom vs. Constraints. Our construction kit
featured a rich selection of materials, to provide expressive
freedom. While all participants found the kit sufficient for realizing their designs, some statements suggest a desire to include
all available material or colour options into the physicalization.
This sometimes aggravated the problem of “tracking too many
things” common in personal logging [10], and, in turn, made
the activity time-consuming and the resulting visualizations
difficult to interpret. An interesting avenue for future research
is the investigation of meaningful constraints for physical and
digital construction tools, as started by Huron et al. [26], considering the trade-off between expressivity and mitigating the
problem of tracking too many categories.
LIMITATIONS

As an ongoing internal process self-reflection is difficult to
study [2]. It is not always possible for people to recall when
and how insight occurred. Participants’ regular diary entries
and pictures of the evolving physicalizations, as well as tailored interviews at multiple stages of the project, reduced this
problem. While we aimed to stay as close as possible to a realistic situation of daily personal physicalization construction,
we acknowledge that diary entries and study setting may have
impacted participants’ activities and reflections. While our participants represent people of different ages and backgrounds,
the sample size is too small to be considered representative.
Future research building on our findings is required to explore
how our results generalize to larger populations.
CONCLUSION

Our study provides a first exploration of constructive physicalization in a personal real-world context. We found that the process facilitated deep reflections on the data, personal context,
actions and values. We discussed how these reflections are
deeply embedded in and supported by the manual construction.
The process allowed people to personalize representations and
integrate these within their personal environment to spark moments of reflection and conversations. Our findings point to
exciting directions for design and future research in the context
of both physicalization creation and tools for self-reflection.
Our results further highlight the potential of physicalization
construction in a personal context, including the fluid integration with people’s routines, benefits for capturing qualitative
and subjective aspects, supporting shared experiences, as well
as the potential of using constructive visualizations as a generative tool for planning and creative exploration.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to our participants for their engagement and
for sharing their thoughts with us. We would also like to thank
Dominikus Baur for his valuable feedback as well as SMART
Technologies, AITF and NSERC for funding this research.

REFERENCES

1. Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, Anna L. Cox, and Yunan
Chen. 2017. Quantifying the Body and Caring for the
Mind: Self-Tracking in Multiple Sclerosis. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 6889–6901. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025869

2. Eric P. S. Baumer. 2015. Reflective Informatics :
Conceptual Dimensions for Designing Technologies of
Reflection. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 585–594. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702234

3. Eric P. S. Baumer, Vera Khovanskaya, Mark Matthews,
Lindsay Reynolds, Victoria Schwanda Sosik, and Geri
Gay. 2014. Reviewing reflection: on the use of reflection
in interactive system design. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’14).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 93–102. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598598

on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1143–1152. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372

11. Juliet M. Corbin and Anselm L. Strauss. 1998. Basics of
qualitative research: techniques and procedures for
developing grounded theory. (1998).
12. Felicia Cordeiro, Daniel A. Epstein, Edison Thomaz,
Elizabeth Bales, Arvind K. Jagannathan, Gregory D.
Abowd, and James Fogarty. 2015. Barriers and Negative
Nudges: Exploring Challenges in Food Journaling. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1159–1162. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155

13. Anna L. Cox, Jon Bird, and Rowanne Fleck. 2013.
Digital Epiphanies: How self-knowledge can change
habits and our attitudes towards them. British HCI habits
workshop (2013), 1–4.
14. John Dewey. 1910. How We Think. D.C. Heath & Co.
Publishers.

4. Richard E. Boyatzis. 1998. Transforming qualitative
information: Thematic analysis and code development.
Sage Publications.

15. Pierre Dragicevic and Yvonne Jansen. 2012. List of
Physical Visualizations. www.dataphys.org/list. (2012).
Last accessed Feb 2015.

5. Stuart K Card, Jock D Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman.
1999. Readings in information visualization: using vision
to think. Morgan Kaufmann.

16. Jose Duarte. 2014. Handmade Visualization Toolkit.
http://www.handmadevisuals.com/. (2014). Last accessed
Sept 2017.

6. Scott Carter and Jennifer Mankoff. 2005. When
participants do the capturing: the role of media in diary
studies. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems (CHI ’05). ACM,
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 899–908.

17. Daniel A Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A
Munson. Ubicomp ’15. A lived informatics model of
personal informatics. In Proceedings of the ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp 2015). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 731–742. DOI:

7. Eun Kyoung Choe, Saeed Abdullah, Mashfiqui Rabbi,
Edison Thomaz, Daniel A Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro,
Matthew Kay, Gregory D Abowd, Tanzeem Choudhury,
James Fogarty, and others. 2017. Semi-automated
tracking: A balanced approach for self-monitoring
applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing 16, 1 (2017),
74–84.
8. Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, and M. C. Schraefel.
2015. Characterizing Visualization Insights from
Quantified Selfers’ Personal Data Presentations. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 35, 4 (2015),
28–37. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2015.51
9. Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Haining Zhu,
Nathalie Henry Riche, and Dominikus Baur. 2017.
Understanding Self - Reflection : How People Reflect on
Personal Data Through Visual Data Exploration. In
Proceedings of EAI International Conference on
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare.
10. Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda
Pratt, and Julie a Kientz. 2014. Understanding
Quantified-Selfers’ Practices in Collecting and Exploring
Personal Data. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250

18. Rowanne Fleck and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2010.
Reflecting on reflection: Framing a Design Landscape. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the Computer-Human
Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia on
Computer-Human Interaction. 216. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1952222.1952269

19. Lars Grammel, Melanie Tory, and Margaret-Anne Storey.
2010. How information visualization novices construct
visualizations. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics 16, 6 (2010), 943–952.
20. Alfred Cort Haddon. 2011. Reports of the Cambridge
Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits: Volume 1,
General Ethnography. Vol. 1. Cambridge University
Press.
21. Lars Hallnäs and Johan Redström. 2001. Slow technology
- Designing for reflection. In Proceedings of the ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp ’01), Vol. 5. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 201–212. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/PL00000019

22. Dandan Huang, Melanie Tory, Bon Adriel Aseniero, Lyn
Bartram, Scott Bateman, Sheelagh Carpendale, Anthony
Tang, and Robert Woodbury. 2015. Personal
Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 21,
3 (2015), 420–433.
23. Michael Hunger. 2008. On LEGO Powered
Time-Tracking My Daily Column Better Software
Development. http://jexp.de/blog/2008/08/on-legopowered-time-tracking-my-daily-column/. (2008). Last
accessed Sept 2017.
24. Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale, Jeremy Boy, and
Jean-Daniel Fekete. 2016. Using VisKit: A Manual for
Running a Constructive Visualization Workshop. In VIS
2016 Workshop on Innovations in the Pedagogy of Data
Visualization.
25. Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale, Alice Thudt,
Anthony Tang, and Michael Mauerer. 2014. Constructive
visualization. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Designing interactive systems (DIS ’14). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 433–442. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598566

26. Samuel Huron, Pauline Gourlet, Uta Hinrichs, Trevor
Hogan, and Yvonne Jansen. 2017. Let’s Get Physical:
Promoting Data Physicalization in Workshop Formats. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS ’17), Vol. 3. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 1409–1422. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064798

27. Yvonne Jansen and Pierre Dragicevic. 2013. An
interaction model for visualizations beyond the desktop.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 19 (2013), 2396–2405. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2013.134

28. Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg, Jason
Alexander, Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram
Subramanian, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2015. Opportunities
and Challenges for Data Physicalization. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 3227–3236. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702180

29. Elisabeth T Kersten-van Dijk, Joyce HDM Westerink,
Femke Beute, and Wijnand A IJsselsteijn. 2017. Personal
Informatics, Self-Insight, and Behavior Change: A
Critical Review of Current Literature. Human–Computer
Interaction (2017), 1–29.
30. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian ’Floyd’
Mueller. 2014. Understanding Physical Activity Through
3D Printed Material Artifacts. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
3835–3844. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557144

31. David Kirsh. 2010. Thinking with external
representations. Ai & Society 25, 4 (2010), 441–454.

32. Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-based
model of personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 557–566.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409
33. Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011.
Understanding My Data, Myself: Supporting
Self-Reflection with Ubicomp Technologies. Proceedings
of the ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing (2011), 405–414. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030166

34. G. Lupi and S. Posavec. 2017. Dear Data Postcard Kit:
For Two Friends to Draw and Share. Princeton
Architectural Press.
https://books.google.ca/books?id=kuFaMQAACAAJ

35. G. Lupi, S. Posavec, and M. Popova. 2016. Dear Data.
Princeton Architectural Press.
https://books.google.ca/books?id=YorTDAAAQBAJ

36. Paul Marshall. 2007. Do Tangible Interfaces Enhance
Learning?. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction (TEI
’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 163–170. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1226969.1227004

37. Harvey Mellar and Joan Bliss. 1994. Learning with
Artificial Worlds: Computer Based Modelling in the
Curriculum. Falmer Press, London, UK, Chapter
Introduction: modelling and education, 1–8.
38. Gonzalo Gabriel Méndez, Uta Hinrichs, and Miguel A
Nacenta. 2017. Bottom-up vs . Top-down : Trade-offs in
Efficiency , Understanding , Freedom and Creativity with
InfoVis Tools. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 841–852.
39. Gonzalo Gabriel Méndez, Miguel A Nacenta, and
Sebastien Vandenheste. 2016. iVoLVER: Interactive
Visual Language for Visualization Extraction and
Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4073–4085. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858435

40. Bettina Nissen and John Bowers. 2015. Data-Things:
Digital Fabrication Situated within Participatory Data
Translation Activities. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’15), Vol. 1. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2467–2476. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702245

41. John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and
Matthew Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking as
lived informatics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1163–1172. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039

42. Donald A Schön. 1984. The reflective practitioner: How
professionals think in action. Vol. 5126. Basic books.
43. Cristiano Storni. 2014. Design challenges for ubiquitous
and personal computing in chronic disease care and
patient empowerment: a case study rethinking diabetes
self-monitoring. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 18,
5 (2014), 1277–1290.
44. Simon Stusak, Aurélien Tabard, Franziska Sauka,
Rohit Ashok Khot, and Andreas Butz. 2014. Activity
sculptures: Exploring the impact of physical
visualizations on running activity. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 20, 12 (2014),
2201–2210.
45. Saiganesh Swaminathan, Conglei Shi, Yvonne Jansen,
Pierre Dragicevic, Lora a. Oehlberg, and Jean-Daniel
Fekete. 2014. Supporting the design and fabrication of
physical visualizations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3845–3854. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557310

46. Alice Thudt, Dominikus Baur, Samuel Huron, and
Sheelagh Carpendale. 2016a. Visual mementos:
Reflecting memories with personal data. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics 22,
1 (2016), 369–378.
47. Alice Thudt, Bongshin Lee, Eun Kyoung Choe, and
Sheelagh Carpendale. 2016b. Expanding Research

Methods for a Realistic Understanding of Personal
Visualization. IEEE Computer Graphics And
Applications Visualization Viewpoints (2016), 12–18.
48. Jagoda Walny, Samuel Huron, and Sheelagh Carpendale.
2015. An exploratory study of data sketching for visual
representation. In Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 34.
Wiley Online Library, 231–240.
49. Mark Whooley, Bernd Ploderer, and Kathleen Gray.
2014. On the Integration of Self-Tracking Data Amongst
Quantified Self Members. Proceedings of the
International BCS Human Computer Interaction
Conference February (2014), 151–160. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.14236/ewic/hci2014.16

50. Wesley Willett and Samuel Huron. 2016. A Constructive
Classroom Exercise for Teaching InfoVis. VIS 2016
Workshop on Innovations in the Pedagogy of Data
Visualization (2016), 1–4.
51. Tiffany Wun, Jennifer Payne, Samuel Huron, and
Sheelagh Carpendale. 2016. Comparing bar chart
authoring with Microsoft Excel and tangible tiles. In
Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 35. 111–120.
52. Claudia Zaslavsky. 1992. Women as the First
Mathematicians.
http://web.nmsu.edu/ pscott/isgem71.htm. (1992). Last
accessed Sept 2017.

