Understanding the needs and desires
of service users in the design and
creation of meaningful physical data
representations.
Ian Gwilt

Abstract

Sheffield Hallam University,

This paper draws on the experiences of a small team of
researchers, led by Professor Gwilt, who have been
exploring novel ways of translating data into physical
formats through an investigation into the potential for
data-driven objects to help in the communication and
sharing of data. The paper draws on a selection of
research projects undertaken within the context of
healthcare and wellbeing wherein data-objects were
designed to help a variety of service users engage with
data. A number of different data-object making and
development strategies are discussed, and considered
in terms of their effectiveness as communication tools.
This discussion includes reflections on; finding and
creating data sources, engaging with service users,
thinking about the use of visual language, metaphor
and material choices, audience needs and experiences,
contexts of use and deployment.
Observations on the conceptual process of creating
hybrid objects and the social-cultural value systems
employed in reading these artefacts are also debated.
A list of guiding principles for the creation of
meaningful physical data representations has been
developed by the authors and is presented in the

Art and Design Research Centre,
Sheffield,
i.gwilt@shu.ac.uk
Nick Dulake
Sheffield Hallam University,
Design Futures
Sheffield,
n.dulake@shu.ac.uk

.

context of the epistemology of the data-object and how
we might implement these methods to ask questions
around the pedagogy of the Physicalisation of data.

Author Keywords
Data-objects, co-design, information design,
information visualisation, physical data

Introduction
Data is the new digital currency; understanding what
different forms data comes in, how it is created and by
whom, where it can be accessed and how it is being
used are increasingly important questions for a society
that has embraced digital technology. Without question
the generation, collection, analysis and use of digital
data is having a dramatic impact on social, economic
and political cultures and services (Prendiville, Gwilt, &
Mitchell, 2017; Mayer- Schönberger & Cukier, 2013).
As citizens we are actively engaged in producing and
consuming data, from the monitoring of personal health
statistics, to the data collected by our various service
providers (both sanctioned and by default), and
through the public records that comment on the state
of the nation.
As digital data has become more accessible, designers
and computer scientists have taken to the task of
visually interpreting data with gusto and a huge range
of data presentation forms from statistical lists to visual
representation techniques such as; bar charts, graphs,
diagrams, illustrations, 3D models, maps, animations,
and generative designs already exist (Kirk 2016). It is
in this context that we will consider the use of physical
objects as carriers of data and ask the questions:
• Can the creation of physical objects based on data
extracted from digital information systems change

the way we read, interpret and respond to complex
information?
• And by reconceptualising digital information into a
physical object can we add new insight to information
to people outside of a scientific or specialist
community?

Finding and using data sources
There is an assumption that the new paradigm of open
data creates an automatic level of transparency in how
data can be accessed and used. Prior research by the
authors has shown that many people find it difficult to
understand and/or relate to statistical lists and graphs
(Gwilt, Yoxall, & Sano, 2012). As Kennedy suggests
(2015), we relate to data both cognitively and
emotionally and this embodied technological experience
forms an important backdrop to current thinking
around the Internet of Things (IOT), smart
environments and objects.
In a recent research exercise the authors embarked on
the process of finding, interpreting and using a
publically accessible, open data set from the UK
healthcare sector. This process revealed a number of
problems around how easy it is to identify and use an
open data source. Further issues were encountered
around where to locate datasets, what form these
datasets are stored in, how to read and open file
formats, as well as concerns around data legitimacy
and relevance. These issues are often overlooked when
talking about the public use of data and the process of
working with data, and would be a good topic to
explore within the workshop.

knowledge, thinking around context of use, and
complex and specific audiences.

Figure 1: Data-objects. Testing a range of data visualisation
forms. In user-testing exercises data gathered on the strength
and dexterity required to open domestic packaging was
presented to users to explore what forms and materials might
aid cognition and engagement. (I. Gwilt, A. Yoxall, K. Sano &
N. Dulake 2012)

Engaging with service users
Choices in how to visualize data as a physical object
should be driven by user needs and expectations and
context of use. Therefore, it is important to engage
user communities in as much of the data visualisation
process as possible. This ranges from including users
in decisions on what data to work with, what are key
things to communicate from the data, to thinking about
the use of different forms and visual metaphors
through which to interpret and realise the data. A good
understanding of the needs and requirements of the
intended audience, and when and how the data is to be
examined is a must. A conversation around strategies
for co-creation could also be discussed in the
workshop; how can we accommodate user needs and

Figure 2: Data-objects used to describe individual pain profiles
created by young adults suffering with chronic-pain. Pain
parametrics are manipulated through a software interface that
allows an individual’s bespoke pain model to be visualized.
These are then produced using a 3d printing process. (N.
Dulake & I. Gwilt 2017)

Value systems and reading physical data
By translating data into a physical object we bring into
play attributes, properties and values, which are
typically assigned separately to digital and material
cultures. The use of visual metaphor, fabrication
process and material choices have all been seen to
influence people’s perception of the underlying data there is a relationship established between the physical
affordances of the object, such as shape, texture, scale
and weight, and the interpretation of the data that
object represents. For example, the amount of
granularity or texture of a surface would appear to
correlate with the perception of how much data that
surface represents, e.g. textured surfaces suggest
more data, smooth surfaces less and so forth. As
Sennett observed (2009), the qualities of material
cultures are extremely important when establishing and
assigning value to the things we use. The data-object
uses a combination of both digital and material

elements to foster insights and comprehension to
complex data.

• Carefully examine the chosen data set to identify the
significant key message/ messages in the data
• Consider how design choices of form and/or use of
visual metaphor relate to the underlying data
• Where possible involve your user community in all
stages of the design and decision making
• Make sure the data object’s form and physical
qualities remain faithful to the underlying data
• Consider how the use of any fabrication techniques
and choices in material might amplify or
sympathetically reflect key trends in the data

Figure 3: The dataseeds project uses the metaphor of the
sycamore seed to represent NHS open data statistics on ‘falls
on and from stairs and steps’. Instances of the data are
physically represented in the form of sycamore seeds that fall
and spin at different rates to visually and dynamically interpret
the data - the data informs the surface areas of the wing which
dictates the spin and falling speed of the data-object. (N.
Dulake & I. Gwilt 2015)

Guiding principles for creating a data-object
Each data-object should be designed with a specific
data-set and audience in mind. Some of the approaches
that might be undertaken in the creation of a physical
data-object have been discussed above. The authors
have drawn up a sequence of guiding principles that
should be considered before creating a data-object:
• Consider what the creation/use of a data-object will
contribute to the communication of the underlying data
and to whom
• Consider your audience and what their expectations
from the data might be
• Carefully select the data set, paying attention to the
credibility of the data source

• Consider where and how the data-object might be
encountered and in what context
• Consider how the data-object might work with other
forms and fit into a larger communication strategy
To conclude, it is important to stress that the authors
do not envisage that the data-object is a way of
substituting other forms for communicating data. The
data-object should be seen as a technique that when
given the appropriate consideration has the potential to
add to the understanding and cognition of any given
dataset. Equally the authors suggest that making data
publically available is only the first step in thinking
about how digital data can be accessed and shared in
meaningful ways by a range of different audiences.

References
Gwilt, I., Yoxall, A., and Sano, K. (2012). Enhancing
the understanding of statistical data through the
creation of physical objects. In Proc. ICDC2012 (2012),
117–126.
Gwilt, I. (2013) Book chapter Data-objects: sharing the
attributes and properties of digital and material culture
to creatively interpret complex information, in

DigiMedia and Technologies for Virtual Artistic Spaces,
Dew Harrision (ed), IGI Global, Pennsylvania, USA
Kennedy, H. (2015) Seeing Data: Visualisation design
should consider how we respond to statistics
emotionally as well as rationally. Retrieved Dec 2016
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/07/
22/seeing-data-how-people-engage-with- datavisualisations/#author
Kirk, A. (2016) Data Visualisation A Handbook for Data
Driven Design, Sage, London, UK.
Mayer-Schönberger, V., & Cukier, K. (2013). Big Data:
A revolution that will transform how we live, work and
think. London, UK: John Murray.
Prendiville, A., Gwilt, I., & Mitchell, V. (2017). Making
sense of Data through Service Design: opportunities
and reflections. In: Prendiville, Alison and Sangiorgi,
Daniela, (eds.) Designing for Service: Key Issues and
New Directions. Bloomsbury.
Sennett, R. (2009) The Craftsman, Penguin Books,
London, UK

