Exploring the role Physicalizations can
play in STEM Learning
Sarah Hayes
Cork Institute of Technology,
Cork, Ireland
sarah.hayes@mycit.ie
Trevor Hogan
Cork Institute of Technology,
Cork, Ireland
Trevor.hogan@cit.ie
Kieran Delaney
Cork Institute of Technology,
Cork, Ireland
Kieran.Delaney@cit.ie

Paste the appropriate copyright/license statement here. ACM now
supports three different publication options:
• ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the
historical approach.
• License: The author(s) retain copyright, but ACM receives an
exclusive publication license.
• Open Access: The author(s) wish to pay for the work to be open
access. The additional fee must be paid to ACM.
This text field is large enough to hold the appropriate release statement
assuming it is single-spaced in Verdana 7 point font. Please do not
change the size of this text box.
Each submission will be assigned a unique DOI string to be included here.

Abstract
We present an overview of our research into the role
data physicalizations can play in enhancing STEM
learning with young people. As objects that by their
very nature embody and allow the manipulation of
data, physicalizations present an ideal method for
permitting students to engage with curriculum subject
matter in more extensive modes and formats than
traditional learning materials. In this paper we present
the motivation and long-term aims of the research
project will be discussed, as well as work completed to
date and current studies being undertaken as part of
this research project. Furthermore, we present a vision
of the future directions our research will take over the
next three years, which will cumulate in the
development of a series of data physicalizations for use
in the teaching and learning of STEM subjects in
secondary schools.

Author Keywords
Data physicalization; Tangibles for learning; materials

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Miscellaneous;

Introduction
The importance of young people pursuing careers in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) is widely recognized [9]. It is also recognized
that some of the most prevalent modern social issues,
such as climate change, cancer research, famine and
pollution, are more than likely going to be solved
through work undertaken in STEM fields [13]. However,
in order for these sectors to grow, it follows that more
students in second level education must opt to continue
studying STEM subjects. Therefore, an effort must be
made to ensure STEM subjects are being delivered in
an engaging and inspiring way.
Our research aims to contribute towards this effort by
focusing on how physical data representations can be
used to increase student learning and engagement with
STEM subjects at a classroom level. The long term aim
of this work is to develop a series of data
physicalizations that can be used in a practical way in
classroom situations by teachers and students to
promote engagement and understanding of STEM
concepts and datasets. The design and development of
these objects will follow an iterative approach, with
feedback from stakeholders (i.e. students and teachers)
guiding design choices at every stage. Part of this
process is the design of a study aimed at gaining an
understanding of people’s feelings about and
perceptions of the materials that have most commonly
been used to construct tangible user interfaces (TUIs)
over the past decade. The methodology, stages and
work related to this study will be outlined and discussed
in subsequent sections of this paper.
The concept of designing data physicalizations for the
teaching of STEM subjects is a relatively novel one,

with little grounding in existing research. However,
given the close connection between the fields of Data
Physicalization and Tangible Interaction, the work
completed in the latter area towards developing
educational tools will be used to guide and inform our
research. The following provides an overview of this
related work.

Data and Tangibles for Teaching and
Learning
The use of tangibles and physical apparatuses to
support STEM learning is not a new concept, and has in
fact been studied for over fifty years. A concise
historical summary of this is provided by Patricia Moyer
[14]. She comments on Jean Piaget's [15] research
which suggested that children aged seven to ten years
old work in primarily concrete ways and that the
abstract notions of mathematics may only be accessible
to them through embodiment in practical resources.
More recently, Hollins [11] has contributed towards
improving our understanding of the importance of
tactical engagement and of using our hands in the
learning process. Multiple researchers have suggested
that TUIs have potential for supporting children’s
informal and formal learning [23; 6]. As one of the
aims of using tangible interaction is to design user
experiences that are embodied, natural and fun [8; 3]
TUIs are therefore ideally suited to use by children. It is
assumed that physical interfaces are easier to use,
support learning and development, and can facilitate
collaboration [4; 10; 22; 23]. For example, researchers
have used child development theory to provide
guidelines on how to design tangibles for children [1]

and have compared how children interact with tangible
versus graphical user interfaces [2].

Figure 1: Material samples used by
Jung and colleagues during their
material probe study

Tangible computing is highly suited to the design and
development of children’s learning activities because it
leverages both familiar physical artefacts and digital
computation. Hands-on learning provides outlets for
children to expand their interests, and promotes growth
of critical thinking [16]. Projects from the
Transformative Learning Technologies Labs address this
problem through developing a variety of physical-todigital educational tools for STEM [5]. From the few
examples provided above alone, the potential for this
body of research for enhancing educational activities is
easily apparent. Our research aims to contribute
towards these existing efforts by approaching the issue
from a Data Physicalization standpoint.

Material Survey

Figure 2: Soap-bubble interface used
by Döring and colleagues

The first study we are completing as part of this
research is an investigation into the current state of the
materials space for the development of TUIs. This study
will explore people’s perceptions of common TUI
materials. The study of experiences prompted by
materials is not a new idea – indeed, there are many
examples of related studies that have sought to
understand different aspects of materials. Tholander
and colleagues investigated the idea of agency in
relation to the emerging properties of materials and
demonstrated how interaction design is often driven by
the characteristics of materials [19]. Additionally,
Schmid and colleagues identified the importance of the
role of materials in TUI design by proposing an inverted
design process that places materials at the forefront of
the design cycle [17]. Research into people’s
experiences of materials has also been completed. Jung

and colleagues [12] used a ‘material probe’ approach
that invited people to tell stories and play with a set of
various materials, before exploring how they differ or
compare to digital devices. Döring and colleagues [7]
conducted a related study in which a soap-bubble
interface (fig. 2) was used to explore a materialscentred approach to tangible interaction. As this study
includes only one type of material, it prompts the
concept of exploring peoples’ perceptions of a larger
number of TUI materials - something we aim to achieve
through our current research focus.

Current Research Focus
Currently, we are focused on completing an ongoing
study into people’s perceptions of materials used to
create TUIs. Thus far, we have completed an extensive
literature review of conference proceedings and online
resources to form a list of frequently used materials for
developing TUIs. Examples of TUIs from which
materials were identified can be seen in Figure 3. This
list will be used to identify materials used in the next
phase of our study, which we are in the process of
implementing at this point in time. This phase involves
the completion of a blended Repertory Grid (Rep Grid)/
focus group study which will explore people’s
perceptions of a set of twelve materials. This study will
take place over the course of an hour and a half
session, during which twelve participants will be asked
to first interact in small groups with the twelve
materials before engaging in a group Rep Grid session
to elicit personal constructs associated with each
material. Materials will be presented in form of an
approximately 20cm by 30cm rectangle, in an effort to
encourage people to think of them as ‘materials' rather
than ‘objects’. The Rep Grid aspect of the study will
involve all participants forming one group, and being

a.

Sand: Inner Garden [18]

b.

Wood: Tangible Scores
[20]

c.

Rubber: MagnetoWear
[21]

Figure 3: A selection of examples
from our material survey.

asked identify a similarity between two or more
materials of their choosing, and a contrast between
these materials and at least one other. For example,
one participant may identify two materials as being
‘bendy’, and another as being ‘rigid’. Once a group
consensus is reached on whether or not a suggested
construct applies, it is either included and recorded on
a whiteboard, or excluded and discarded. Data will be
collected in four ways during the study - (1)
transcriptions of the Rep Grid filled out by the
researcher on the whiteboard, (2) audio and video
recordings of the session, (3) transcripts of group
discussions and (4) field notes taken during the
session. This data will be used to both feed into the
next stage of the study (see Future Work section) and
to provide qualitative data to further clarify participant
opinions and choices of language and meaning.

different materials with technology affects people’s
interactions with them. Building on the insights
established during the materials study phase into the
associations and experiences people have with the
studied materials, we will begin a series of exploratory
activities into how these perceptions alter or are
enhanced by the addition of multi-sensory technologies.
Additionally, we will begin engaging with stakeholders
(i.e. teachers and second-level students) in exercises
exploring how data physicalizations can intersect with
the current STEM curriculum in Irish secondary schools.
Through a series of semi-structured interviews, focus
groups and interactive workshops, we will work towards
arriving at a series of openings for our research to
complement and improve upon the current educational
materials for STEM learning. This will provide a starting
point for initiating the design process for our artefacts.

Future Work

Finally, a prime objective in the immediate future of our
research is to design and implement a series of digital
literacy studies with user groups. Although it is
generally assumed that teenagers have strong digital
literacy skills, the extent, depth and variety of these
skills must be explored in order for us to successfully
design technological tools for these users. Similarly, the
technical knowledge of teachers must be explored, to
ensure user needs are being met within the constraints
of their knowledge and abilities. Through the
completion of each of the above exercises, we will
move further towards the design and implementation of
data physicalizations objects that can be used
practically in classrooms. In doing so, we aim to arrive
at an understanding of how data physicalization
artefacts can be employed to further STEM learning and
student engagement.

The immediate goal of our research following the
completion of the Rep Grid stage is the undertaking of
a large scale analysis of all materials used in TUIs. The
qualitative data collected during the Rep Grid phase will
then be used to form categories in a survey to
investigate how each material is perceived by a wider
audience. Participants will access this survey using
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk1 service. This will allow us to
collect data from hundreds of participants. The data
collected from this stage of the study will provide the
basis for a useful tool for analyzing, selecting and
designing with materials for TUIs. For example, it could
be consulted by designers during the prototyping
process to aid in the selection of materials for a TUI.
After completing the present study into the materials
space for TUIs, we intend to explore how augmenting

1See

https://www.mturk.com/

References
1.

Antle, A.N. 2007. The CTI framework: informing
the design of tangible systems for children. In
Proceedngs of the first international conference on
Tangible and Embedded Interaction (TEI '07), 195202.

2.

Antle, A.N. et al. 2009. Hands on what?: comparing
children's mouse-based and tangible-based
interaction. In Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on Interaction Design and Children. 8088.

3.

Baauw, E., and Markopoulous, P. 2004. A
comparison of think-aloud and post-task interview
for usability testing with children. In Proceedings of
the 2004 conference on Interaction Design and
Children: building a community. 115-116.

4.

Bakker, S., Antle, A.N., Van Den Hoven, E. 2012.
Embodied metaphors in tangible interaction design.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 16, 4, 433-449.

5.

Blikstein, P. 2010. A New Age in Digital Tangible
Interfaces for Learning. Learning in the Disciplines:
Proc. of ICLS 2010. ISLS.

6.

Carbonneau, K. J., Marley, S. C. & Selg, S. C.
2013. A meta-analysis of the efficacy of teaching
mathematics with concrete manipulatives. Journal
of Educational Psychology. Vol 105 (2) pp. 380-400

7.

Döring, T., Sylvester, A. and Schmidt, A. 2012.
Exploring material-centered design concepts for
tangible interaction. In Proceedings of the 2012
ACM annual conference extended abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended
Abstracts (CHI EA ’12). 1523.

8.

9.

Dourish, P. 2001. Where the action is: The
foundations of embodied interaction. MIT Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Duffy, M. 2016. "Michael Duffy: Stem Education
Critical for Country’s Future". The Irish Times. Web.
Accessed 20 Apr. 2017.

10. Hengeveld, B. 2008. Let me actuate you. In
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
Tangible and Embedded Interaction. 159-166.
11. Hollins, E. R. 2015. Culture in school learning:
Revealing the deep meaning. Routledge.
12. Jung, H. and Stolterman, E. 2011. Material probe:
exploring materiality of digital artifacts. In
Proceedings of the fifth international conference on
Tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction
(TEI ’11). ACM. 153.
13. MacCraith, B. "It's Time To Get Serious About STEM
Education In Ireland". Silicon Republic. 2014. Web.
21 Apr. 2017.
14. Moyer, P. (2001) Are we having fun yet? How
teachers use manipulatives to teach mathematics.
Educational Studies in Mathematics 47: 175-197.
Netherlands: Kluwer.
15. Piaget, J. 1952. The Child's Conception of Number.
New York: Humanities Press.
16. Resnick, M., & Silverman, B. 2005. Some
reflections on designing construction kits for kids.
Proc. of IDC 2005 ACM Press, 117– 122.
17. Schmid, M., Rümelin, S. and Richter, H. 2013.
Empowering materiality: inspiring the design of
tangible interactions. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded
and Embodied Interaction (TEI '13). ACM. 91-98.
18. Sol Roo, J., Gervais, R. and Hachet, M. (2016).
Inner Garden: an Augmented Sandbox Designed
for Self-Reflection. In Proceedings of the TEI ’16:
Tenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’16).
ACM. 570–576.
19. Tholander, J. Normark, M. and Rossitto, C. 2012.
Understanding agency in interaction design
materials. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
'12). ACM. 2499-2508.

20. Tomás, E. (2016). Tangible Scores. In Proceedings
of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction
(TEI ’16). ACM. 669–674
21. Vijay, R. S. and Goyal, S. (2016). MagnetoWear. In
Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (TEI ’16). ACM. 597–602.
22. Xie, L., Antle, A.N. Motamedi, N. 2008. Are
tangibles more fun?: comparing children's
enjoyment and engagement using physical,
graphical and tangible user interfaces. In
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
Tangible and embedded interaction. 191-198.
23. Zaman, B., Van den Abeele, V., Markopoulos, P.
and Marshall, P. 2012. Editorial: the evolving field
of tangible interaction for children

