Data Sculptures as a Playful and
Low-Tech Introduction to Working with
Data
Rahul Bhargava
MIT Center for Civic Media
Cambridge, MA, USA
rahulb@mit.edu

Catherine D’Ignazio
Emerson Engagement Game
Lab
Boston, MA, USA
catherine_dignazio@emerson.edu

Abstract
There is a large and growing population of novice learners entering the field of working with data to tell stories, but
they face many challenges related to process, methods and
tools. This paper argues that activities focused on building physical manifestations of data, where some variable
is mapped onto a physical artifact, are uniquely well-suited
to scaffolding a process and exposing learners to methods so that they may take the next step in a learning journey. We introduce our pedagogical motivations as well as
three principles that guide our work - use familiar materials,
stay low-tech, and create a playground. Three case studies demonstrate how the playful activities we create based
on these principles help novice learners explore advanced
concepts very quickly. This work strongly suggests that creating data sculptures helps novices overcome initial barriers
to learning, set expectations for a data storytelling process,
and feel empowered to take the next step.

Author Keywords
data literacy; data physicalization; data sculptures; pedagogy; hands-on, case studies

Introduction
The surge in popularity of data visualization, fueled by "big
data" narratives in popular press and viral infographics on
social media has led large numbers of novices to enter the

field of data-driven storytelling. These novices include students wanting to launch careers, nonprofit staff wanting to
create change in new ways, journalists creating new forms
of reporting, and engineers wishing to communicate complicated concepts clearly and effectively.
Unfortunately, the complexity and technological underpinnings of the data analysis pipeline are intimidating to newcomers. To understand these challenges better, we can
look at survey responses about barriers to working with
data collected by a local nonprofit training program1 . When
asked "What are your biggest challenges?" when working
with data, a lightweight analysis shows answers centered
on themes related to technical complexity and a lack of
awareness of both process and tools. For instance, many
pointed to a "lack of knowledge". Others mentioned "finding
appropriate/right models/tools" or "Finding the right technology". Many came to the workshops to "get more experience" on "communication of impact".
These survey responses document the attitudes and anxieties that we have encountered in workshop settings with
novices over the past ten years. The process of going from
data to story is perceived as a dark art or a black box. While
there are many learning materials online, these tool trainings2 and academic modules3 require a higher level of
buy-in than most novice learners can afford. They focus

1
The surveys were conducted by our collaborator Tech Networks of
Boston and TNB Labs at 5 unique sessions they hosted in early 2017
(n=340). A more thorough coding and analysis of these results is beyond
the scope of this short paper.
2
Tableau is just one of the many tool companies
that provides an extensive set of video-based trainings:
https://www.tableau.com/learn/training
3
Online learning modules for those wishing to enter the field
of data science have taken off. See this example on Udemy:
https://www.udemy.com/datascience/

on technical language and digital technologies, two areas
that intimidate novices that might not have digital fluency.
We argue that the activity of creating low-tech physicalizations of data is particularly well-suited to introduce novices
to the process of finding stories in data and telling these
stories to others. Specifically, producing three dimensional
physical encodings of data quickly, with familiar materials,
lets these learners enter the space of working with data in
an unintimidating way. These learners want to tell stories
with their data, not become "data analysts". With this audience in mind, we refer to these objects by the much more
friendly name of "data sculptures"4 .
Three principles guide the Data Sculpture activities that we
believe carry these benefits:
• Use familiar materials: This reduces the psychological barriers to learning; meeting learners where they
are and building their confidence.
• Go low-tech: This allows for a focus on underlying
concepts and mental models needed to work with
data, regardless of the toolchain employed once the
learner is further along in their journey.
• Create a playground: Allowing the learner to move
from data to story quickly, with acknowledged disregard for nuance and details, models the longer process and helps them build confidence for taking the
next step.
This paper supports our argument with short case studies
from 10 years of leading hands-on data sculpture activities in a variety of educational settings. First, we discuss
4
It is hard to trace the original use of the term, but Bhargava was first
exposed to it in 2013 via an episode of the Data Stories podcast [1]

doing short 5-minute building activities in professional development workshops with non-expert audiences. Second,
we look at creations made by undergraduate and graduate students in week-long data sculpture "sketching" exercises. Third, we look at some nascent work introducing data
sculptures to elementary school students in classroom settings. We reflect on each of these settings to support our
argument that data sculptures are a uniquely appropriate
approach for helping novice audiences move past the barriers they see to building their data literacy.

commodate" it [18]. We also draw inspirations from Freire’s
approach to contextualizing content in the settings that matter to the learner [7]. For Freire, the material artifacts were
a strong component of creating a connection between the
learner and the content. Another inspiration can be found in
the work of James Rojas, who reinterprets urban planning
as participatory play by using low-tech materials to engage
the general public in discussions [19]. Our data sculpture
activities use a variety of physical craft materials sourced
from near the site of each workshop (see Figure 1).

Pedagogical Inspirations

Go Low-Tech
It is critical to keep in mind novice learners when designing
ways for newcomers to enter a technology-oriented space.
There are numerous interesting high-tech physical interfaces being created, many of them emerging from the field
of tangible interfaces [12, 10, 21]. We find more appropriate
inspiration for our contexts in work such as "squishy circuits" [14], "crafting technology" [4], and "data edibilization"
[22]. These approaches present an opportunity to create
something in a physical language that is familiar and delightful to the learner. These echo the ideas of Froebel’s
gifts - which gave kindergarten children building blocks
to construct with that made sense for their natural world
and setting [8]. More recent work has found that in settings
where one wants to promote interactive dialog with the audience about the data, informal presentations of data can
work better than formal ones [2, 23]. These approaches are
driving a rethinking of civic and political action in democracies, towards more data-centric and visualized processes
that might offer more opportunity for engagement [3, 24,
13].

Our engaged workshops draw inspiration from a number
of existing pedagogical approaches. One central idea is
Seymour Papert’s Constructionist approach to learning. Papert argues that the most meaningful learning experiences
come when learners are deeply engaged in designing and
creating things [17]. These physical objects we create embody our learnings, and serve as physical foils which others
can react to and reflect on. The interactive dialog through
and with these objects is a powerful path to learning. Another central idea, inspired by the history of feminist thinking, is to reframe who is allowed, and who isn’t allowed, to
create with data [6]. Data sculptures provide an opportunity
to empower more diverse audiences to tell stories with data
that can create change in the world around them. What follows is a brief background of the theory behind each of our
three underlying principles.

Figure 1: Examples of some of the
types of materials used to create
quick data sculptures.

Use Familiar Materials
This principle harkens back to the founders of our current
model of approaching pedagogy. We can begin with Piaget’s dismissal of the idea of learners as empty vessels to
be filled with knowledge. He advocated for respecting learners’ lived experiences and how those experiences either
"assimilated" new knowledge, or had to be adapted to "ac-

Create a Playground
There is a long history of participatory workshops that inspire our approach. Recent work has brought this history

to data physicalization [11]. In addition, we follow the guidance of noted developmental psychologist and learning
researcher Edith Ackermann. She reminds us why handson, arts-based workshops can be a powerful setting by
noting that "in a playful environment you feel safe enough
to explore ideas that would otherwise be risky" [20]. This
guidance suggests a pathway to overcoming the fear felt
by many novice learners, by carefully crafting the activity
environment so they do feel "safe" - a key precondition to
receptiveness to learning. However, Ackermann also notes
that "you cannot use play or fun as a pretext". The playful
approach you craft must be deeply tied to the topic at hand;
and must help learners take the next step in a learning journey.
Figure 2: A sample of the type of
one-page handout used to support
the Data Sculpture activity in a
workshop setting.

Case Studies
With these pedagogical inspirations and guiding principles
in mind, we can begin to discuss the settings we have created. In each we will support our argument that creating
low-tech physicalizations of data is uniquely well-suited to
introduce novices to the process of finding stories in data
and telling these stories to others.
Data Sculptures as a Workshop Ice-Breaker Activity
Professional development settings are fraught with failed
attempts to build data literacy, or a data culture, within corporate walls. These efforts, usually led by the IT department, generally involve tool trainings and long days in front
of computer screens. This seldom relates to the problems
faced by ordinary staff, often instead attempting to train
them in the emerging field of data science.

Figure 3: Two data sculptures
created by participants at a
workshop.

Over the last ten years we’ve run short data sculpture exercises at dozens of workshops targeting this audience. Our
short activity involves working with the key stakeholders
before the workshop to develop a simple 1-page data hand-

out, summarizing some relevant data with traditional charts
and graphs (see Figure 2). Recent work on "Data Placemats" has explored the role of these types of handouts
in building understanding when bringing together groups
around data [16]. Generally, during the workshop a central
table holds materials carefully selected from local vendors,
made with local materials. Participants are then told to pair
up and given 6 minutes to build something that represents
some story in the data they see. Key advice includes thinking with their hands, and not simply creating a bar chart out
of pipe cleaners or other such materials.
A facilitated discussion after the frenzied building period allows opportunities for highlighting the depth of storytelling
that can be done with such simple materials, on multiple
axes. There is inevitably a rich visual symbology developed.
There is always a variety of types of stories told (comparison stories, stories over time, "factoid" stories, etc). Visual
and physical variables can be explored by noting creative
use of color, size and positioning (see Figure 3). These
questions of narrative structure, variable mapping, and
symbology that the participants constructions raise relate
to the current issues of study in the field of data visualization and physicalization [13]. Novice learners often struggle
with going from data, to story, to visual presentation, yet in
this activity they can experiment with all three in a simple,
unintimidating setting with familiar materials. We find that
participants recognize the ease with which these underlying
concepts transfer over to more complicated (digital) tools
available, achieving a key learning outcome.
Week-Long Higher Education Data Sculptures Sketches
Over the last three years Bhargava has taught a "Data Storytelling Studio" course at the undergraduate and graduate
levels at MIT (through the humanities department). This attracts students from across institutions and disciplines with

a hands-on exploration of the strengths and weaknesses
of various techniques for telling data-driven stories. These
techniques include traditional charts and graphs, mapping,
interactive games, data sculptures, and more. Each technique is tackled by small groups with just one week to go
from sample data to a "sketch" of an idea. The data sculptures students make illustrate their ability to think about
what kind of stories are well suited to be told with physical
materials5 .
These students are generelly technically adept, so they focus on how to put a story together and tell it to a specific
audience. An illustrative sketch from a student group in
2016 focused on refugee populations in the state of Massachusetts in the US. Built on a flat map of the state, it included vertical bar charts to represent the population of
refugees from different home countries in various major
cities in the area (see Figure 4). This allowed for a quick
interpretation by viewers familiar with the state’s geography, and basic visual data literacy. However, each physical
bar opened up and contained a stack of cards representing
various members of that community, which they included
to "quite literally gives a glimpse into the lives of refugee
populations in MA" (student quote).

Figure 4: A data sculpture about
refugees in Massachusetts.

This sketch, created by a team of 4 in just one week of inclass and out-of-class time, demonstrates fluency with a
number of basic questions related to telling stories with
data. The sketch picks a subset of the data related to a
story the learners care about. They write that they wanted
to tell this story "because the integration challenges that
refugee populations face is something that should involve
the entire host community". The sketch maps data onto visual variables in multiply reinforced ways - "because it is
very legible and because it resembles a building, an image
5

Explore 2016 sketches at http://datastudio2016.datatherapy.org/

that situates our project within the urban and/or social context of each city" (student writing). It mixes quantitative and
qualitative data. It builds on that mix to offer an invitation for
readers to explore a deeper layer of reading to flesh out the
significance of the data story - to perform a "physical action
intending to reveal more information about refugee population in that city" (student writing). This project demonstrates
how in a short period of time the students were able to explore some fundamental concepts of creating data sculptures - the mapping of physical variables, allowing for layers
of reading, and careful combination of elements to construct a physically interactive story. They argue that this
combination serves to "bring across our message for the
need of integration of refugee and native communities and
to show how we are already all living side-by-side" (student
writing).
Data Sculptures for Elementary School Students
Elementary school programs around the world have recently joined the STEAM movement - including the Arts
along with the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
curricular focus [15]. Data sculptures are well suited to this
STEAM approach, leading us to explore opportunities with
youth. Recently we’ve worked the MIT Museum and a network of primary schools around the globe to create a "creativity challenge" related to data. After being introduced
to data sculpture techniques at a training with Bhargava,
teachers led K-5 students at 10 schools in identifying a
topic to research, collecting data, and creating presentations to tell a data-driven story. Working with this age group
to build data literacy provides a unique set of challenges
and opportunities related to vocabulary, visual literacy, and
statistical literacy [9, 5].
This nascent collaboration suggests that thinking about the
data as something that could be represented in physical

form, both concretely and abstractly, is natural to these
students. One example is a group that investigated backpack weight across their school. To convey the story of how
heavy the average bag was back to their audience of peers,
they filled a backpack with the correct weight of rocks "to
see if people could hold it" (student participant). This literal
mapping enhanced a poster board with more detailed data
about their findings. Another group at a different school creatively mapped air pollution to a more abstract artistic rendering on a loom (see Figure 5). In their own words, they:

Figure 5: An abstract
representation of air quality in
colors on a loom.

...looked at the data by color coding the stripes.
They represent how the pollution was. So
green is normal. Yellow is more than normal.
Red is basically more than one hundred fifty.
These examples, and others, suggest a strong willingness
in young children to get excited about, and engaged in, data
and physicalization on topics they care about. These preliminary efforts point us towards future work to outline and
document learning outcomes embodied by data sculptures
in more detailed ways. Piggybacking on the momentum and
energy within the migration from STEM to STEAM could
readily lead to a massive STEAM-powered rollout for data
sculptures.

Conclusion
We argue that activity-based data sculptures with low-tech
materials are uniquely suited to introduce novice learners
into the field of working with data. The examples above
serve to back up the argument that novices in these settings can very quickly begin to engage problems that visualization experts face everyday, including selecting physical and visual variables, data mappings to those, layers of
reading, and narrative structures. Our pedagogical inspirations guide us to offer familiar materials that help these

learners overcome any psychological barriers to entering
the field and build self-efficacy. The physical manifestation of a learner’s data-driven story allows for reflective
discussion and learning in lightweight collaborative learning communities. This shifts the conversation around data
from one between people and tools, to one between people
and people, mediated by the physical artifacts they create. This brings us back to approaches like Freire’s, which
thinks about learning and literacy as a path to empowerment rather than simply skill-building. Our work strongly
suggests that data sculptures are particularly well-suited
to help novices overcome the barriers to learning and empower them to work with data to solve the problems they
think are most important.

REFERENCES
1. Enrico Bertini and Moritz Stefaner. 2013. 17 | Data
Sculptures. Number 17 in Data Stories.
http://datastori.es/episode17-data-sculptures/
2. Rahul Bhargava, Ricardo Kadouaki, Emily Bhargava,
Guilherme Castro, and Catherine DâĂŹIgnazio. 2016.
Data Murals: Using the Arts to Build Data Literacy. The
Journal of Community Informatics 12, 3 (Oct 2016).
http://ci-journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/
view/1276
3. Samuel Bohman. 2015. Data Visualization: An
Untapped Potential for Political Participation and Civic
Engagement. Springer, Cham, 302–315. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22389-6_22
4. Leah Buechley and Hannah Perner-Wilson. 2012.
Crafting Technology: Reimagining the Processes,
Materials, and Cultures of Electronics. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 19, 3 (Oct 2012), 21:1–21:21.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2362364.2362369

5. Sayamindu Dasgupta and Benjamin Mako Hill. 2017.
Scratch Community Blocks: Supporting Children as
Data Scientists. arXiv:1702.00112 [cs] (Jan 2017).
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025847
arXiv: 1702.00112.
6. Catherine DâĂŹIgnazio and Lauren F. Klein. 2016.
Feminist Data Visualization.
7. Paulo Freire. 1968. Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
8. Friedrich Frobel. 1885. The Education of Man. A. Lovell
& Company. Google-Books-ID: ADkXAAAAYAAJ.
9. Samantha Hautea, Sayamindu Dasgupta, and
Benjamin Mako Hill. 2017. Youth Perspectives on
Critical Data Literacies. ACM, 919âĂŞ930. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025823
10. Steven Houben, Connie Golsteijn, Sarah Gallacher,
Rose Johnson, Saskia Bakker, Nicolai Marquardt, Licia
Capra, and Yvonne Rogers. 2016. Physikit: Data
Engagement Through Physical Ambient Visualizations
in the Home. ACM, 1608–1619. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858059
11. Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale, Jeremy Boy,
and Jean-Daniel Fekete. 2016. Using VisKit: A Manual
for Running a Constructive Visualization Workshop.
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01384388/
12. Hiroshi Ishii. 2008. The Tangible User Interface and Its
Evolution. Commun. ACM 51, 6 (Jun 2008), 32–36.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1349026.1349034
13. Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg,
Jason Alexander, Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram
Subramanian, and Kasper Hornbaek. 2015.
Opportunities and challenges for data physicalization.
ACM, 3227–3236.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2702180

14. Samuel Johnson and AnnMarie P. Thomas. 2010.
Squishy Circuits: A Tangible Medium for Electronics
Education. ACM, 4099–4104. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753846.1754109
15. John Maeda. 2012. STEM to STEAM: Art in K-12 Is
Key to Building a Strong Economy. (Oct 2012).
https://www.edutopia.org/blog/
stem-to-steam-strengthens-economy-john-maeda
16. Veena Pankaj and Ann K. Emery. 2016. Data
Placemats: A Facilitative Technique Designed to
Enhance Stakeholder Understanding of Data: Data
Placemats. New Directions for Evaluation 2016, 149
(Mar 2016), 81–93. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.20181
17. Seymour Papert. 1993. The children’s machine.
Vol. 96. http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/~ctg/classes/
techcog02/readings/childrensmachine.pdf
18. Jean Piaget. 1952. The origins of intelligence in
children. Vol. 8, No. 5. International Universities Press.
19. James Rojas and John Kamp. 2016. PLACE IT!
Interactive Workshops. (2016).
http://www.placeit.org/interactive.html
20. The Tinkering Studio. 2014. Edith Ackermann’s
Pedagogical Perspective on Tinkering & Making.
(2014). https://vimeo.com/104178407
21. Faisal Taher, John Hardy, Abhijit Karnik, Christian
Weichel, Yvonne Jansen, Kasper Hornbẽk, and Jason
Alexander. 2015. Exploring Interactions with Physically
Dynamic Bar Charts. ACM, 3237–3246. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702604

22. Yun Wang, Xiaojuan Ma, Qiong Luo, and Huamin Qu.
2016. Data Edibilization: Representing Data with Food.
ACM, 409–422. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892570
23. Jo Wood, Petra Isenberg, Tobias Isenberg, Jason
Dykes, Nadia Boukhelifa, and Aidan Slingsby. 2012.
Sketchy Rendering for Information Visualization. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics

18, 12 (Dec 2012), 2749–2758. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2012.262
24. Jack Zhao and Andrew Vande Moere. 2008.
Embodiment in Data Sculpture: A Model of the
Physical Visualization of Information. ACM, 343–350.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1413634.1413696

