Augmented and Tangible
Environments: A Tool for
Physicalization of Contents by Children
in School Context?
Stéphanie Fleck

Christian Bastien

Abstract

Université de Lorraine - PErSEUS,

Université de Lorraine - PErSEUS,

EA 7312 - 57045 Metz, France

EA 7312 - 57045 Metz, France

stephanie.fleck@univ-lorraine.fr

christian.bastien@univ-lorraine.fr

Alexis Olry

Robin Vivian

Université de Lorraine - PErSEUS,

Université de Lorraine - PErSEUS,

EA 7312 - 57045 Metz, France

EA 7312 - 57045 Metz, France

alexis.olry@univ-lorraine.fr

robin.vivian@univ-lorraine.fr

David Bertolo

Martin Hachet

Université de Lorraine - LCOMS,

Inria- Potioc

EA 7306 - 57045 Metz, France

33405 Talence, France

david.bertolo@univ-lorraine.fr

martin.hachet@inria.fr

The aim of this communication is to present our
approach to design a tangible and augmented
environment for learning. In addition to the well-known
user centered methods for designing interactive
systems, our approach integrates disciplines such as
HCI, Ergonomics, Instructional design, and Pedagogy.
Our work will be illustrated with the presentation of a
project founded by the French Government. This
project aims at enabling children and teens to
conceptualize by themselves. Its main goal is to
enhance children and teenagers disciplinary and
collaborative learning at school by promoting social
relationship, knowledge sharing and the construction of
concepts to learn through various levers of
physicalizations.

• ACM holds the copyright on the work.

Author Keywords
Tangible Augmented Interface; Physicalization;
Collaborative Learning; Pedagogy; Affordance.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.1. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Multimedia Information Systems; H.5.2.

Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g., HCI):
User Interfaces; K.3.1. Computers and Education:
Computer Uses in Education

Introduction

Figure 1: Illustration of our
instructional design space and
processes. It shows how the
learners, the teachers, the
contents and the technological
modules are integrated in the
design of the instructional
environment.

In educational contexts (formal or informal), many
difficulties met by the learners come from the
abstraction level of the contents they have to learn.
The knowledge can remain elusive to the students.
Consequently, the teaching can become meaningless
for them and their motivation can decrease. It is very
common that a modeling representation, i.e. a
physicalization of a concept, designed by the teacher or
provided by a pedagogical support (physical and/or
digital), does not make sense to the students.
Moreover, the modeling of content, mediated through a
support or an interface, cannot be considered without
taking into account the contents to learn. For example,
the nature of the knowledge, its didactic structure, as
well as the educational objectives influences the
modeling of a concept and its meaningful potential.
In this position paper, we describe our approach in
providing a new way to design instructional
environment for both the learners and the teachers
(Figure 1).

Empowering the learners in content
physicalization
As for the affordance concept defined by Norman [1],
the previous experiences and/or learning influence the
perception and the meaning of the environment a userlearner may have. In the same way, the personal needs
or what the learners expect from a content to learn
could influence their appraisal [2] and their selective
attention. Then, the gap between the learners’ mental

model and the mental model of the person who
designed the support can make the representation of
the content to learn too complex for the students
preventing them from learning. Furthermore, the
learners’ characteristics such as their age, cognitive
developmental stages and/or learning abilities, impact
their conceptualization possibilities. Therefore, the
content modeling should be learner-centered. However,
the diversity and the heterogeneity of the students in a
given classroom represent a real difficulty for a
designer (both form Instructional Design -ID- or
Human Computer Interaction -HCI-) wanting to provide
an adapted model for each learner profile.
All those arguments, supported by active learning
principles, converge through the need to enable the
students to physicalize, structure and/or construct by
themselves the contents to learn. More than providing
data or knowledge totally modeled by someone else,
teachers and/or a learning interface should securitize
and/or guide (i.e. scaffold) the learners in this task.

Tangible and Augmented interfaces to
scaffold learning
The IT field currently takes advantage of the
technological maturity of the Tangible User Interfaces
(TUIs) or Augmented Reality (AR) to develop new
human-computer interactions. AR and TUI, as expose
in numerous previous studies [3-7], open up new
perspectives for tomorrow's teaching applications. For
example, a TUI provides a very hands-on approach by
offering different input affordances (as well as physical
constraints) to the user, while AR offers a flexible and
situated way to give visual feedback. As discussed in
our previous works, the content to learn can then be
manipulated and augmented in many dimensions of

space and time directly in the physical space (e.g. [8,
9]).
Taking into account the two dimensions of the notion of
tangibility, this type of interface provides the learners
with various contents that become more tangible; i.e. a
content to learn i) that the reality could become
undeniable; and ii) that could be manipulated.
Providing the possibility of a hybrid physicalization of
educational contents through Tangible and Augmented
interfaces may enable the learners to visually and
physically interact with the knowledge. Therefore, this
type of interfaces could scaffold the construction of
robust mental conceptualization and could empower the
students in their learning tasks.

Collaborative learning in an hybrid
environment

Figure 2: An example of a e-TAC
that could be developed in the
project.

A tangible and augmented environment could enhance
the nature of the visualisation, and enable the userslearners to investigate the structure of the knowledge
through direct manipulation. But, we also consider
essential to develop an environment that enables
collaborative learning. Such learning aims at
encouraging knowledge acquisition [10-12], disciplinary
competences and psychosocial competences (such as
problem solving, decision-making, critical/creative
thinking, eloquence and interpersonal skills).
We think that a Tangible and Augmented Collaborative
learning environment (i.e. an e-TAC)(see Figure 2)
could empower the children or teenagers, individually
and collectively, in the specific skills necessary to
become autonomous in their learning process.
Providing the students with multimodal and hybrid
interactions in their real social environment could

scaffold their abstraction mind in development, and
their capabilities towards content representation,
helped by new possibilities to collectively physicalize
the content to learn. To this end, we will focus on the
learners’ interactions with the interfaces, the
knowledge and their peers to identify the factors
(ergonomics, digital and didactic) that facilitate or not
learning, while taking into account the heterogeneous
nature of our target population.

The e-TAC project
During the workshop, we will discuss the grounding
elements that guide our approach in designing a
Tangible and Augmented Collaborative learning
environment.
Our project, which started in January 2017, is driven by
the high expectation for educational and technological
innovation of the French government. In this
interdisciplinary project involving digital sciences and
human sciences, Human-Computer Interaction (HCI),
Ergonomics and Instructional Design (ID) are coupled
in a systemic approach in order to develop not only the
interface but also the content to learn.
Its main goals are to enhance children and teenagers
disciplinary and collaborative learning at school by
promoting social relationship (pairs exchange, work
groups…), knowledge sharing and the construction of
concepts to learn through various levels of interactions.
More precisely, this project aims at enabling children
and teens to conceptualize by themselves through a
new type of hybrid space of physicalization.

Finally, another aim is to develop an e-TAC that can be
expanded outside of the project’s action area while
meeting learners and teachers needs.

Acknowledgment
The e-TAC project is financially supported by the French
government in the e-FRAN call for projects within the
framework of the Program of Investments for the
Future (PIA) operated by Caisse des Dépôts et
Consignation. We thanks all the members of the four
French research teams involved in this project
(PERSEUS, CREM-PIXEL and LCOMS from Université de
Lorraine, and POTIOC from Inria), CANOPE Grand Est
and l’atelier CANOPE 57, the OPEN EDGE start-up, the
16 teachers and more than 200 children and teenagers
who would be part of the co-design process.

References

1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

Norman, D. A. 1999. Affordance, conventions, and
design. interactions, 6, 3, 38-43.
Scherer, K. R. 1999. Appraisal theory. In Handbook of
cognition and emotion, T. Dalgleish and M. J. Power
(Eds.), John Wiley & Sons Ltd, New York, NY, US, 637663.
Gilutz, S., Calvert, S., Kremer, K., Chamberlin, B. and
Gay, G. Tangible interfaces for children: cognitive,
social, & physical benefits and challenges. ACM, City,
2012.
Horn, M. S., Crouser, R. J. and Bers, M. U. 2012.
Tangible interaction and learning: the case for a
hybrid approach. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 16, 4, 379-389.
Price, S. and Marshall, P. 2013. Designing for learning
with tangible technologies. Handbook of Design in
Educational Technology, 288.

6.

Schneider, B., Jermann, P., Zufferey, G. and
Dillenbourg, P. 2011. Benefits of a Tangible Interface
for Collaborative Learning and Interaction. Learning
Technologies, IEEE Transactions on, 4, 3, 222-232.
7. Shaer, O. and Hornecker, E. 2010. Tangible user
interfaces: past, present, and future directions.
Foundations and Trends in Human-Computer
Interaction, 3, 1–2, 1-137.
8. Fleck, S. and Hachet, M. 2016. Making tangible the
intangible: Hybridization of the real and the virtual to
enhance learning of abstract phenomena. Frontiers in
ICT, 3, 30.
9. Fleck, S., Hachet, M. and Bastien, J. M. C. 2015.
Marker-based augmented reality: Instructionaldesign to improve children interactions with
astronomical concepts. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCHI 14th International Conference on Interaction
Design and Children, 21-28,
10.1145/2771839.2771842.
10. Dillenbourg, P. 1999. What do you mean by
collaborative learning? Collaborative-learning:
Cognitive and computational approaches., 1-19.
11. Hutchins, E. 2001. Distributed cognition. In
International Encyclopedia of the Social and
Behavioral Sciences., N. Smelser and P. Baltes (Eds.),
Elsevier Science, Oxford, 2068-2072.
12. Matthews, R. S., Cooper, J. L., Davidson, N. and
Hawkes, P. 1995. Building Bridges Between
Cooperative and Collaborative Learning. Change: The
Magazine of Higher Learning, 27, 4, 35-40.

