Learning Underlying Principles of
Physicalization by Tangible, Embodied,
and Iterative Fabrication
Jeeeun Kim

Abstract

Computer Science

Recent advances in digital fabrication (DF) technology
enabled designers to easily physicalize conceptual
ideas, virtual designs, and information data into tactual
forms. Albeit designers’ natural tendencies to iteratively
refine ideas and apply their discoveries from the
physicalization process into the next iteration, today’s
DF machines do not support live design in-situ, tight
feedback loop, or an opportunity to intervene making
process by physical design actions-- that a designer can
intuitively learn underlying principles of fabrication with
their muscle memories. In this paper, we propose
Human Fabrication Interaction (HFI), novel interaction
techniques that provide a natural mapping between
embodied design activities and physical objects being
produced. A designer will not only interact with the
virtual model or design tools, but s/he should be also
able to interact with the fabricator’s behaviors and
partial outcomes generated by physical mechanisms.

University of Colorado Boulder
jeeeun.kim@colorado.edu
Abigale Stangl
ATLAS Institute
University of Colorado Boulder
Abigale.stangl@colorado.edu
Tom Yeh
Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
tom.yeh@colorado.edu

Author Keywords
ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the
historical approach. Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). Workshop
on Pedagogy & Physicalization: Designing Learning Activities around
Physical Data Representations at DIS 2017.

HFI; Physicalization; Physicality of Fabrication Process;

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Miscellaneous

Fabrication as A Physicalization Method
Thanks to recent advances in personal fabrication
technology and the wealth of online sharing
communities of digital models along with instructions,
such as Thingiverse 1 and Instructables 2, the makers 's
community can easily become creators using digital
fabrication (DF) techniques. They can make their ideas
become physical objects, which we refer to as data
physicalization, and earned easy access to the DF as an
object physicalization method, gradually creating
innovate their ions on craft practices.
DF has become one of the promising approaches to
replace manual routines of handcraft that physicalize
information, conceptual ideas, scientific notion, and
more (See Figure 1) in precise, meticulous form that
human hands might not able to achieve. Empowered by
a rich set of predefined templates and primitives for a
reinterpretation of contents [6], designers with
different level of skillsets are able to create digital
models that will be produced in a palpable form via
fabricators. Further, burgeoning of free software that
supports parametric design, for example, CraftML,
enabled easy customization and modifications to adapt
unique individual needs [4].
Figure 1. Fabrication became a
promising method to produce tactile
materials to develop literacy (top, by
3D printing) [1], to physicalize
conceptual idea such as bio
data(middle, by a mechanical plotter)
[7], and generate tangible
representation of scientific notion
such as world GDP (bottom, by
lasercutting) [2], and so forth.

Lost Muscle Memories of Physical Designing
Unfortunately, even if designers with different
background and skillset can easily design physical
materials in a digital platform, the hands on, embodied
and tangible experiences of design are often reduced.
Like in traditional craft practices, the embodied and
tangible experience of designing physical objects
1
2

http://www.thingiverse.com
http://www.instructables.com

provides one with a deeper, material understanding of
what they are creating and an intuitive appreciation
about underlying mechanisms of procedures in
physicalization activities—that are missing in current
fabrication pipeline with DF tools.
Current fabrication process by DF machines disconnects
a designer’s muscle memory of the creation process,
which is traditionally learned through physical
experiences that have been natively supported in
conventional handcraft practices. The simple action of
‘drawing a circle’ provides young children kinematic
motor memory to move her arm around the shape to
complete the task. Similarly, folding origami, quilling,
etc., assign makers the memory of force added to the
material or hand tools to handle them, direction to add
force, and tactile experiences on hands.
Looking back on our memories of conventional craft
practices (i.e. knitting, ceramic throwing, and glass
blowing), designer’s engagements in a tight feedback
loop to recall such muscle memories, from materiality
to a process managing them, let the designer decide
physical form factors to produce a final outcome in-situ.
For example, in a ceramic throwing process, a designer
kneads clay, by feeling the viscosity and elasticity while
s/he prepares the material, and so slightly differentiate
hand force to handle clay, hand tools to mold/carve/
sculpt, and the amount of supplementary materials
being added to the creation process [3].

Tight Feedback Loop to Make in-situ Design
Decision

As designers, makers, and creators become familiar
with operating DF tools, such as 3D printers and laser
engravers, they may start to notice how the fine tuned
machines perform specific actions and parameters and
the impact these actions have on different materials,
and vice versa. For example, a cherry plywood get
different engraving effects from the same settings
applied to oak plywood. Designers also obtain
contrasting result by applying different machine
settings, for example, various laser frequencies and a
nozzle’s movement speeds to laser, to the same
materials. A tight feedback loop allows designers to see
effect right away, to adapt live consequences and
update design decision along with. Such benefit is
never acquired in a virtual designing process, only via
physical designing activities.

Physicality in Physicalization Process

Figure 2. With the HFI, users can
learn the physicality of physicalization
process, touching not only the
produced outcome, but also the
physicalized procedures in the entire
fabrication pipeline.

Currently, users’ design activities are mostly conducted
at screen based CAD tools, restraining the information
flow in a uni-directional pipeline as illustrated in Figure2
left. It limits the ability of physical, live, and direct
manipulations of the product being produced in the
middle of process. As mentioned above, many
designers only get a glimpse of the material/machine
relationship at the final stage of production. Although
the latest innovations in designing applications
effectively provide fluid and flexible rendering result
projected on screens, a chasm between a digital model
created by a designer from CAD tools and a physical
form produced by fabricators is not tightly interpolated.
Unlike traditional craft practices where designers
participate in the entire creation process to reinterpret
the initial idea, change and update design idea in-situ,
in a current DF pipeline, designers certainly lose their

control on various aspects that affect details of the final
outcome.
In contrast, a proactive approach to participation in this
process will enable designers to make iterative
interventions in their designs, and to quickly
experiment with design actions that produce real-time,
physical partial outcomes, that needs to be gradually
adapted into the final object. (See Figure2 right). This
approach allows the designer to see the live aftermath
of their design actions so that they can understand how
fabricators’ behavior affects the physicalized objects
and adapt such effects into their design in-the-wild.

Interaction with a partial outcome
Once a designer starts to interact with not only CAD
design tools or a virtual design of model, but also with
the fabrication process itself, and partial outcomes they
are actively producing within it—they will be able to get
muscle memories of physicalization activities, learning
the process with bodily remembrance. Designers’ direct
interaction with the process and partial outcomes will
allow open communication between a user and DF
tools. They will be allowed to make live ad-hoc design
decisions, so can touch the production ‘process’ of
physicalization, as well as physical artifacts produced.

Learning Underlying Mechanisms of
Physicalization
We propose HFI, human-fabricator interaction, which
changes the perspective to see fabrication as a live
physicalization method. HFI frees users physicalization
activity from CAD-based interaction, leading towards a
tangible, accessible real-time intervention during the
production process [5]. It also enables designers to
mingle digital design and existing real-world objects,

enabling direct modifications of an object that is being
physicalized, by understanding unique properties of
materials, and adapting physical dynamics occurred in
a creation process. Throughout a live, tangible, and
embodied interaction between a designer and
fabricators, HFI will teach users various basics of
principles to construct physical object-- i.e. constructive
geometry operations to create a new shape, binary
operations between existing 3D shapes, and physical
settings that control the behaviors of machines.
In that vein, such activities let users gradually
comprehend the underlying mechanisms of design
activities, for example, appreciate ‘subtraction’ or
‘intersection’ by inserting a real-world material into an
object being produced from an original digital model set
to machine’s production cycle. Furthermore,
understanding machine specific parameters by seeing
the direct mapping between designers’ design actions
and generated partial results in a tight feedback loop,
will benefit designers by supporting opportunity of rethinking design, making decisions in-situ, applying
adjusted techniques to deliver right context of
physicalized contents.

3.

Laura Devendorf and Daniela K. Rosner. 2015.
Reimagining Digital Fabrication as Performance Art.
In Extended Abstracts of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA
'15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 555-566.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732507

4.

Jeeeun Kim, Anhong Guo, Tom Yeh, Scott E.
Hudson. 2017. Understanding Uncertainty in
Measurement and Accommodating its Impacts in
3D Modeling and Priniting. In Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive
Systems (DIS '17). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2815-2824. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064690

5.

Jeeeun Kim, Haruki Takahashi, Homei Miyashita,
Michelle Annett and Tom Yeh. 2017. Machines as
Co-Designers: A Fiction on the Future of HumanFabrication Machine Interaction, (alt.chi) In
Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of the 35th
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI’17). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 2815-2824. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3052763

6.

Jeeeun Kim and Tom Yeh. 2015. Toward 3D-Printed
Movable Tactile Pictures for Children with Visual
Impairments. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2815-2824. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702144

7.

Bin Yu, Rogier Arents, Jun Hu, Mathias Funk, Loe
Feijs. HeartPlotter: Visualizing Bio-data by Drawing
on Paper. In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2016),
San Jose, CA, USA, 2016

References
1.

Fittle Fish,
http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:127089

2.

List of Physical Visualization and Related Artifacts
http://dataphys.org/list/andreas-fischers-datasculptures

