A Personal Visualisation Future:
Domestic Data Sculptures
Lisa Koeman
ICRI Cities
University College London
London, United Kingdom
lisa.koeman.12@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
As the collection and analysis of personal data has
become increasingly prominent in the lives of many, an
important question arises: how can such personal data
best be conveyed in informal settings such as the home?
In this paper, the argument for an exploration of personal
visualisations beyond the screens of laptops, tablets and
mobile devices is made. In particular, the potential of
interactive domestic data sculptures is highlighted. A brief
overview of the work that has been done in the area of
physical visualisations till date is provided and three
design challenges of creating personal data sculptures are
discussed.

Author Keywords
Personal visualisation, data sculptures, physical
visualisations, personal data, ambient technology

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI)]: Miscellaneous.
Paste the appropriate copyright statement here. ACM now supports three
diﬀerent copyright statements:
• ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the historical
approach.
• License: The author(s) retain copyright, but ACM receives an exclusive
publication license.
• Open Access: The author(s) wish to pay for the work to be open access.
The additional fee must be paid to ACM.
This text field is large enough to hold the appropriate release statement
assuming it is single spaced.

General Terms
Design, Human Factors

Introduction

Physical visualisations

Seven unread e-mails, 88 heartbeats per minute, two
friend requests, 5043 steps, 132 micrograms of NO2 per
cubic metre of air, 14 socks to wash and the neighbour’s
music is just over 100 decibels. Personal data is
everywhere. Advances in technology have made it
increasingly easy and aﬀordable to collect such data,
whether it relates to an individual’s health, social network
or local environment. Gathering these types of data can
be useful for a number of reasons: to give insight, to
inform, to motivate behaviour change, to predict, and so
forth. As these types of data can be of importance to
many, the main challenge is: how do we enable easy
analysis and manipulation of such personal data?

The concept of physical visualisations is defined by Jansen
et al. [4] as “visualisations that are made of physical
matter, as opposed to presented on a computer screen or
projected on a surface as it is traditionally the case” (for
examples, see: [1, 2, 6, 8]). The use of physical matter
when visualising data is motivated by the many
aﬀordances physicality is believed to have, such as
embodiment and more natural interactions [7].

As the visualisation of data has proven to be valuable
when analysing data in professional settings, it seems only
natural to also turn to visualisations when dealing with
data in personal settings. However, there are various
diﬀerences between these two settings. For example, in
the former the visualisations are generally aimed at expert
users, whereas people in personal settings cannot be
assumed to be knowledgeable about data, data analysis
and data visualisation. Pousman et al. [5] argue that
non-experts require more casual information visualisation.
However, how to create such casual visualisations, and
more specifically: how to create such casual visualisations
of personal data, is currently still largely unknown.
In this paper, we argue that the current popularity of
digital fabrication, the aﬀordability of rapid prototyping
platforms and the existing knowledge of aﬀordances of
physical visualisations should be combined to create
interactive domestic data sculptures.

A popular type of physical visualisations are data
sculptures. Such sculptures are defined by Zhao et al. [8]
“data-based physical artefacts, possessing both artistic
and functional qualities, that aim to augment a nearby
audience’s understanding of data insights and any socially
relevant issues that underlie it”. In short: tangible
representations of data are used to convey content,
generally to a lay audience. While such sculptures have
been used for centuries (see [2]), the combination of
physical visualisations and technology is more recent –
with one of the first examples dating from 1992: Durrell
Bishop’s Marble Answering Machine (described in [3]).

Domestic data sculptures
As can be seen in the overview of active physical
visualisations created by Dragicevic et al. [1], till date few
data sculptures have focused on the presentation of
personal data. Furthermore, the majority of sculptures are
developed as part of art projects, meaning few empirical
evaluations have taken place. This highlights the need for
the creation and evaluation of interactive domestic data
sculptures.
While previously, the creation of interactive visualisations
would have been costly and feasible for experts only, the
arrival of digital fabrication technology (e.g. laser cutting

machines, 3D printers) and rapid prototyping platforms
(e.g. Arduino and .NET Gadgeteer) have this process
simple and aﬀordable. Similar to ambient technology,
such sculptures should be designed keeping aesthetics,
ease of use and enjoyment in mind, allowing non-experts
to interpret the personal data they gather in an accessible
and playful manner.

other technology for them home, whether ambient, calm
or otherwise, this is not a novel challenge in the domain of
HCI. Nevertheless, designing the data sculptures in such a
way that they fit into people’s homes and are accepted as
part of the environment will be critical to their success.
How can we design data sculptures customised to the
aesthetic taste and interaction preferences of individuals?

Design challenges

Visualising for the everyday
As domestic data sculptures fulfil a role in the home
similar to that of art, they are likely to be present for long
periods of time. To ensure the sculptures will remain
relevant over time, their design needs to be adjust
accordingly. To encourage sustained usage over time, the
sculptures could potentially be configured in diﬀerent
ways, providing diﬀerent visualisations of the same data –
thus preventing inevitable boredom with the display.
Alternatively, the sculptures could be made out of cheap
(and preferably environmentally friendly) materials that
are disposable, allowing people to replace the outer layer
of the physical visualisations and repurposing the
technology. How can we prevent data sculptures from
becoming unused over time, once the novelty wears oﬀ?

Though all the tools for the development of domestic data
sculptures are readily available, there are a number of
design challenges that need to be overcome, including:
Visualising for the individual
As the name suggests, personal data is primarily very
personal – and so any attempts at visualising,
manipulating and analysing such data will have to take the
person to whom it belongs into consideration. While some
people may gather data on their health for very specific
purposes, others may only want to know about extreme
outliers in the data. Similarly, while some people may be
looking for correlations between diﬀerent data sources,
others may only care about changes over time. For the
creation of successful domestic data sculptures, they will
need to be highly customised, as the interests and needs
of the person in question will have to be taken into
consideration in order to make them relevant. How can we
take specific and evolving requirements of individuals into
consideration when designing domestic data sculptures?
Visualising for the home
Besides the interests and needs relating to the data,
designing for the home means the person’s preferences
relating to aesthetics and interaction of the data sculpture
will also have to taken into account. As similar constraints
have to be considered when designing and developing

Conclusion
As more and more personal data is gathered and stored by
individuals, a new challenge emerges: visualising this data
for lay people. As physicality has a range of aﬀordances,
the exploration of interactive domestic data sculptures is
highlighted in this paper as a potential method of
communicating data in everyday settings. Despite the
work done in the area of physical visualisations, tangible
computing and ambient technology, several design
challenges remain. In this paper, three of these challenges
are described: visualising for the individual, home and
everyday.

References
[1] Dragicevic, P., and Jansen, Y. List of Active Physical
Visualizations. Retrieved March 2014, from:
http://www.aviz.fr/Research/ActivePhysicalVisualizations.
[2] Dragicevic, P., and Jansen, Y. List of Passive Physical
Visualizations. Retrieved March 2014, from:
http://www.aviz.fr/Research/PassivePhysicalVisualizations.
[3] Ishii, H., and Ullmer, B. Tangible bits: towards
seamless interfaces between people, bits and atoms. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Human factors in computing systems, ACM (1997),
234–241.
[4] Jansen, Y., Dragicevic, P., and Fekete, J.-D.
Evaluating the eﬃciency of physical visualizations. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (2013),
2593–2602.
[5] Pousman, Z., Stasko, J. T., and Mateas, M. Casual

information visualization: Depictions of data in
everyday life. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Transactions on 13, 6 (2007), 1145–1152.
[6] Vande Moere, A. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel:
Exploring the physicality of information visualization.
In Information Visualisation, 2008. IV’08. 12th
International Conference, IEEE (2008), 469–474.
[7] Vande Moere, A., and Patel, S. The physical
visualization of information: Designing data sculptures
in an educational context. In Visual Information
Communication. Springer, 2010, 1–23.
[8] Zhao, J., and Moere, A. V. Embodiment in data
sculpture: a model of the physical visualization of
information. In Proceedings of the 3rd international
conference on Digital Interactive Media in
Entertainment and Arts, ACM (2008), 343–350.

