Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

AwareKit: Exploring a Tangible
Interaction Paradigm for Digital
Calendars
Andrii Matviienko
University of Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
andrii.matviienko@unioldenburg.de

Wilko Heuten
OFFIS - Institute for Information
Technology
Oldenburg, Germany
wilko.heuten@offis.de

Swamy Ananthanarayan
University of Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
s.ananthanarayan@unioldenburg.de

Susanne Boll
University of Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
susanne.boll@uni-oldenburg.de

Abstract
Digital calendars are a conventional tool for planning meetings and providing information about the availability of others. In this paper, we explore an alternative tangible way
of interaction with existing electronic calendaring systems.
Our prototype, called AwareKit, is a tangible toolkit aimed
at supplementing existing electronic calendar systems and
exploits quick, fun and playful interaction. It integrates an
attractive design and utilizes touch and rotation as interaction techniques to access different types of information. In
this paper, we outline the design concept of AwareKit, its
hardware implementation and the first usability feedback.
The results of the pilot usability study showed that AwareKit
is easy to use and facilitates intuitive and playful interaction.

Author Keywords
Interactive calendar; Tangible interaction; Physical visualization; Awareness display; Internet of things (IoT).

ACM Classification Keywords
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
CHI’17 Extended Abstracts, May 06–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
ACM 978-1-4503-4656-6/17/05.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3053111

H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]:
Miscellaneous

Introduction
Digital calendars play an important role in planning meetings, handling invitations and setting reminders in the professional environment [19]. Moreover, they provide the in1877

Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

formation regarding colleagues’ availability not only about
the current moment, but also with regard to the future. Another advantage of digital calendars is their flexible accessibility from both desktop computers and mobile phones
[23, 21].
Given these advantages and the ubiquitous usage of digital calendars, in our work we aim to supplement them to
facilitate quick access to calendar information in a fun and
interactive manner. Our goal was to explore an alternative
tangible way to interact with digital calendars via a tangible
toolkit, called AwareKit (Figure 1). It is not meant to replace
digital calendars, but rather supplement them in an intuitive,
fun and interactive manner.
This networked toolkit provides availability information (day
and week) for a single or a group of colleague(s) via different feedback modalities, such as light and sound, without
need for a smart phone or desktop application. The modules in AwareKit, can be rotated, touched and connected to
provide working colleagues with different calendar information in unique and personalized ways.
Before diving into system design and implementation, we
provide an example of a possible usage scenario. Work
colleagues Mike and Tom enjoy discussing research ideas
over a cup of coffee when they have a free minute. However, they often lack information regarding each other’s
availability. Using a tangible figure that represents Mike,
Tom touches a dedicated module in a quick and playful
manner, which shows Mike’s availability for today. Seeing
that Mike is available now, Tom decides to come to his office for a small talk.

Related Work
Our work has been influenced by prior research in computational toolkits and tangible awareness systems. There-

Figure 1: AwareKit consists of six types of tangible modules.
Four modules for retrieving availability information (in the center),
tangible figures and magnetic connectors. Tangible acrylic figures
used to represent individual colleagues and magnetic connectors
for communication between modules.

fore, we cover a small subset of related systems that our
work builds on.
Tangible systems and interfaces habe been introduced in
different domains since the early works by Ishii and Ulmer [12]. They have shown to increase awareness via
various objects and modalities, and further engage interaction through their affordances and physical properties
[12, 9, 13]. For example, Klemmer et al. [14] presented
Papier-Mâché, a toolkit for building tangible user interfaces
using computer vision, bar codes and electronic tags. They
showed how users could easily build new interfaces and
adapt applications to other technologies. Ananthanarayan
et al. [1] presented a computational toolkit that combines
craft and health, allowing children to craft their own tangible
1878

Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

health visualizations based on data from an accompanying wearable device. Results of the study with PhysiKit by
Housen et al. [10] showed that people get engaged into
exploring the physical and ambient representation of environmental information by interacting with a physical toolkit.

Figure 2: A Day module.

Figure 3: A Week module.

Figure 4: A Reminder module.

As for tangible awareness systems, Peek et al.[20] proposed a system with a physical representation of instant
messaging contacts via hanging tangible avatars. Hausen
et al. [5] presented different ways of facilitating the state
management for instant messaging systems in an interactive way. They investigated a peripheral interaction for
changing own state and provided an overview of the states
of others at a glance. Holleis et al. [8] presented a set of
small independent displays that communicate with each
other. By changing the position of these objects one can
change a user’s state and see it immediately on the object.
Other ambient awareness systems, such as SpiralClock [3]
and AmbientTimer [18], showed the feasibility of light as a
medium to represent information about upcoming events
in an unobtrusive manner. Other systems, such as ForgetMe-Not [26] and Cubble [15], allowed users to interactively
change their states and stay connected with distant peers.
More recent work also showed the feasibility of using a tangible event awareness device based on electronic calendar
information in the form of a cube [16]. With CubeLendar
one can access information from an electronic calendar by
rotating an object and retrieving one chunk of information
per each cube’s face.
Much like other tangible toolkits [10, 1, 17], AwareKit is designed as a set of separate modules to provide users with
more interaction freedom. Each module encapsulates particular functionality and interaction, and aims to increase
awareness. In order to engage users, the toolkit is designed
with playful icons, shapes and colors. It also leverages am-

Figure 5: A ToolTip module.

bient feedback mechanisms for usage in an office environment. In the following sections, we describe the design, implementation and the initial usability feedback of our toolkit.

Design Concept
AwareKit consists of six types of tangible modules. Four of
the modules enable users to retrieve availability information
for single or multiple colleagues, and two of the modules
facilitate communication and interaction between the modules.
The unique shapes of the four modules are suggestive of
the action or information they present. The Day module,
which shows availability over a day, looks like an analog
clock since it provides an overview of typical working hours
(7 a.m to 7 p.m.) (Figure 2). The Week module is based
on an analog calendar representation; it is rectangular
shaped and provides an overview of the typical working
days (Monday-Friday) at a glance (Figure 3). The Reminder
module, which notifies users about a person’s availability, has the shape of a bell, which is well-known and commonly used representation for a reminder in the existing
software applications, such as Google Notifications1 , Just
Reminder2 , Nag3 , etc (Figure 4). Finally, the ToolTip module helps in finding out about the states of other modules;
it looks like a magnifying glass since it provides more information about other objects in a way similar its real life
counterpart (Figure 4).
The two components that facilitate interaction between the
four aforementioned modules include tangible figures that

1

https://plus.google.com/notifications
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=in.smsoft.
justremind&hl=en
3
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/nag-multiple-timers-alarms/
id391957434?mt=8
2

1879

Late-Breaking Work

Figure 6: An example of a module
activation.

Figure 7: Communication between
Day and Week (top view):
Availability for Wednesday next
week.

Figure 8: Communication between
Day and Week (bottom view).

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

can be assigned to particular colleagues and magnetic connectors that enable communication between the different
modules. The tangible figure component represents an individual and allows activating all four modules. Tangible
figures also differ in colors and genders to give users an
opportunity to create unique and personalized mappings to
their real colleagues. A user can manually assign a given
figure to a particular colleague. This figure can also be reassigned to another person in the future.The second magnetic component facilitates connection between the modules (Figure 1).
A user can activate a module by touching the tangible figure to the top of the module (Figure 6), similar to Nintendo4
and Lego Dimensions5 games. In the case of the Day and
Week modules, an activation (signified by a red LED blink)
shows the associated colleague’s availability via LED indicators. There are 12 LED indicators corresponding to the
12 working hours for the Day module, and 5 LED indicators for the working days (e.g. Monday - Friday) in the Week
module. A green light signifies that the person is free (no
appointments); a yellow light represents that the colleague
is somewhat free (at least half an hour/day), and a red light
indicates not free (less than half an hour/day).
Additionally, the Week module can be tilted to the left or
right to alternate between the current and subsequent week.
The LED arrows indicate possible directions for rotation.
Thus, if the right LED arrow is illuminated, the user is in the
current week and can look at next week’s availability data
by tilting the module to the right. Similarly, the user can tilt
left from the future week to the current week.

4
5

http://www.nintendo.com/amiibo/
https://www.lego.com/en-us/dimensions

The Day and Week modules can also be interfaced together using the magnetic connectors at one of four equidistant locations located at the bottom of the modules (Figures
7 and 8). After connecting the Day and Week modules, the
user can press the button associated with a particular day
on the Week module and see detailed hourly availability
data on the Day module for the selected day.
One can additionally touch the Day or Week modules with
multiple tangible figures to see overlapping availability for a
selected group of colleagues (perhaps to find a free timeslot
within the group).
The Reminder module enables users to setup a quick alarm
for the next available slot in a colleague’s calendar for the
current day. It indicates a successful and unsuccessful
alarm setting through a green and red LED, respectively
(Figure 4). When a colleague becomes free, the module
rings softly like a bell.
Finally, the ToolTip module can be used to display the current state information of the other modules on a small LCD
screen. This is accomplished by placing the ToolTip module
on top of another module. For example, when the ToolTip
module is placed on top of the Day module, the screen displays the name of colleague whose availability is currently
shown. When one touches the Reminder module with the
ToolTip module, the LCD display shows what the notification is about (Figure 9). In a similar interaction with a tangible figure, the display shows the name of the colleague
mapped to a particular figure.

System Implementation
The Day (7,5 x 7,5 cm), Week (12,5 x 5,5 cm), Reminder
(10,5 x 11 cm) and ToolTip (7,5 x 13,5 cm) modules of
AwareKit are housed in lasercut clear Plexiglass with a
semi-opaque Plexiglass top to diffuse LED light. For the
1880

Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

purposes of consistency and to facilitate connections with
the magnetic connectors, all four ambient modules have
the same height of four cm. The 10 cm tangible Plexiglass
figures each contain a unique RFID tag on the bottom that
maps to a particular individual. The magnetic connectors
(1,2 x 4,5 cm) contain two circular neodymium magnets that
are connected by thin wire channel.
Figure 9: Checking a Reminder
with a ToolTip module.

Figure 10: Participant is
interacting with AwareKit during a
pilot usability study.

Each of the ambient modules contains a NodeMCU 8266
board6 with an integrated Wi-Fi module and powered by a
LiPo battery that can be charged via two pins at the bottom
(Figure 8). In addition, each module has an integrated RFID
reader for touch-based interaction with tangible figures, and
RFID tags for a touch-based interaction with the ToolTip
module.
For the Day, Week and Reminder modules, we used Neopixels7 to represent information, while the ToolTip has a 1.8"
TFT LCD display for showing textual information. To enable
interaction with a Week module via rotation, we decided to
use an accelerometer module to infer tilt.
Ambient modules are completely autonomous and communicate over Wi-Fi through JavaScript to the Google calendars of all colleagues. For the implementation of AwareKit
we decided to use the Google scripts service since it provides easy retrieval of information from a Google calendar
and communication with NodeMCU boards.

Pilot Usability Study
To evaluate our prototype, we recruited twelve participants
(six female) aged between 22 and 57 (M = 33.83, SD =
10.26) from a local research institute. The participants
had different indoor professional occupations, such as re6
7

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NodeMCU
https://www.adafruit.com/category/168

searcher, student assistant, library assistant, secretary
and service worker. Participants were given three tasks
which involved all modules, components and interactions of
AwareKit. For this study, participants received a preconfigured system, but in a future study they will be able to configure it themselves using a custom Android application.
For the first task participants had to find out the availability
of a particular colleague for the current day, current week
and subsequent week. For the second task participants
had to find out the availability for a group of colleagues for
a particular hour on a particular day. For the third task participants had to set a reminder for a particular colleague.
If he was not available at the moment, they were asked to
check the state of the Reminder module when it rang after
a couple of minutes. After all tasks were completed, participants were asked to fill in a 10-item questionnaire based
on the System Usability Scale (SUS) [2]. Additionally, they
were asked about the usability and implementation problems they experienced while interacting with the toolkit in a
subsequent interview.

Results
Overall, participants found AwareKit fun and easy to use.
The prototype received SUS score of 87.29, where any
SUS score greater than 70 is considered as usable. They
were also able to finish all the tasks without additional help.
The shapes of the modules were functionally intuitive. For
example: "Tipping was easy and intuitive to do. I find it also
good that a magnifying glass [ToolTip] gives me more information about the objects. Metaphors were easy to understand." [P4].
For all three tasks, however, participants had problems
finding a spot for positioning a tangible figure on top of the
modules to activate them. During the first and second tasks
1881

Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

three participants had problems understanding the encoding of hours on a Day module. For example, P4 said: "It’s
hard to understand whether she has time at 9 am or time
between 9 and 10. The mapping was not clear for me." As
for the last task, six participants perceived a red light on a
Reminder module as an indication of a person’s unavailability and a green light as a person’s availability, which created
some confusion. For example, P5 mentioned: "It was weird
and confusing whether light was about availability or not."
All participants could see themselves using AwareKit regularly in a working environment. The Day module, however, might be more useful than the Week and Reminder
modules. For example, P1 said: "I would use a Day and a
Reminder for short meetings. For meetings in the future I
would use my electronic calendar."

Discussion & Future Work
We aim to use AwareKit to increase situational awareness
in both professional and private environments, since electronic calendaring systems are also widely used among
family members [4]. Based on these use cases and supporting literature [6, 24], we consider a long-term study with
repeated interviews and automatic logging of users’ activities. We suspect that AwareKit might be better suited
for day to day or current week data, since users already
mentioned during the interviews that if they wanted to look
ahead next week, they would use electronic calendars.
From an implementation perspective, we identified three
main problems from the pilot usability study. Before conducting future experiments, we will add a marker on top of
the modules indicating the spot for placing tangible figures.
We also plan on increasing the granularity of hours on the
Day module and changing the state colors for the Reminder
module.

Tangible interactive systems are known to facilitate smooth
transition of attention between background and foreground
[12, 11]. Moreover, tangible objects provide a sense of intimacy, which is sometimes hard to achieve with screenbased interfaces. Thus, AwareKit has the potential of increasing spontaneous and informal communication among
colleagues, which influences their productivity and social
connectedness [7].
In a working environment, AwareKit can also play the role
of a "bridge" between spatially distributed teams. This
would allow us to investigate the seamless transitions between implicit and explicit communication among colleagues.
This part of social communication is an emerging field
and has not been comprehensively studied yet [22, 25]. It
would also be interesting to explore AwareKit in the context of large groups. For example, with 15 colleagues, users
might have trouble remembering all the tangible figures they
touched to a particular module or make interaction mistakes.
Since the modules of AwareKit are completely autonomous
and ambient, users can also take them to meetings. The
modules of AwareKit can help colleagues find the next suitable meeting’s date after the meeting is over. It would be
interesting to explore AwareKit in these different use cases
to discover boundary conditions of this tangible interaction
paradigm for calendaring.

Acknowledgements
This research has been performed with a support from
German Research Foundation (DFG) funding for project
SOCIAL (FR 806/15-1 – BO 1645/12-1). We thank all the
participants of our study for their helpful and constructive
feedback.

1882

Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

References
[1] Swamy Ananthanarayan, Katie Siek, and Michael
Eisenberg. 2016. A Craft Approach to Health Awareness in Children. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. ACM,
724–735.
[2] John Brooke and others. 1996. SUS-A quick and dirty
usability scale. Usability evaluation in industry 189,
194 (1996), 4–7.
[3] Pierre Dragicevic and Stéphane Huot. 2002. SpiraClock: a continuous and non-intrusive display for
upcoming events. In CHI’02 extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 604–605.
[4] Kathryn Elliot and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2005.
Awareness and coordination: A calendar for families.
(2005).
[5] Doris Hausen, Sebastian Boring, Clara Lueling, Simone Rodestock, and Andreas Butz. 2012. StaTube:
facilitating state management in instant messaging
systems. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied
Interaction. ACM, 283–290.
[6] William R Hazlewood, Erik Stolterman, and Kay Connelly. 2011. Issues in evaluating ambient displays
in the wild: two case studies. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems. ACM, 877–886.
[7] Pamela J Hinds and Mark Mortensen. 2005. Understanding conflict in geographically distributed teams:
The moderating effects of shared identity, shared context, and spontaneous communication. Organization
science 16, 3 (2005), 290–307.
[8] Paul Holleis, Matthias Kranz, and Albrecht Schmidt.
2005. Displayed connectivity. In Adjunct Proceedings
Ubicomp, Vol. 5. Citeseer.

[9] Eva Hornecker and Jacob Buur. 2006. Getting a grip
on tangible interaction: a framework on physical space
and social interaction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in computing systems.
ACM, 437–446.
[10] Steven Houben, Connie Golsteijn, Sarah Gallacher,
Rose Johnson, Saskia Bakker, Nicolai Marquardt, Licia Capra, and Yvonne Rogers. 2016. Physikit: Data
Engagement Through Physical Ambient Visualizations
in the Home. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
1608–1619.
[11] Hiroshi Ishii. 2007. Tangible user interfaces. CRC
Press.
[12] Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer. 1997. Tangible bits:
towards seamless interfaces between people, bits and
atoms. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM,
234–241.
[13] Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg,
Jason Alexander, Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram
Subramanian, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2015. Opportunities and challenges for data physicalization. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 3227–
3236.
[14] Scott R Klemmer, Jack Li, James Lin, and James A
Landay. 2004. Papier-Mache: toolkit support for tangible input. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 399–406.
[15] Robert Kowalski, Sebastian Loehmann, and Doris
Hausen. 2013. cubble: a multi-device hybrid approach
supporting communication in long-distance relationships. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction. ACM, 201–204.
1883

Late-Breaking Work

CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

[16] Andrii Matviienko, Sebastian Horwege, Lennart Frick,
Christoph Ressel, and Susanne Boll. 2016. CubeLendar: Design of a Tangible Interactive Event Awareness
Cube. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 2601–2608.
[17] David A Mellis, Sam Jacoby, Leah Buechley, Hannah
Perner-Wilson, and Jie Qi. 2013. Microcontrollers as
material: crafting circuits with paper, conductive ink,
electronic components, and an untoolkit. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded and Embodied Interaction. ACM, 83–90.
[18] Heiko Müller, Anastasia Kazakova, Martin Pielot, Wilko
Heuten, and Susanne Boll. 2013. Ambient timer–
unobtrusively reminding users of upcoming tasks with
ambient light. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction. Springer, 211–228.
[19] Leysia Palen and Jonathan Grudin. 2003. Discretionary adoption of group support software: Lessons
from calendar applications. In Implementing collaboration technologies in industry. Springer, 159–180.
[20] Nadya Peek, David Pitman, and others. 2009. Hangsters: tangible peripheral interactive avatars for instant
messaging. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction.
ACM, 25–26.
[21] Anna Sell and Pirkko Walden. 2006. Mobile digital calendars: an interview study. In Proceedings of the 39th
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System

Sciences (HICSS’06), Vol. 1. IEEE, 23b–23b.
[22] Norbert A Streitz, Carsten Röcker, Thorsten Prante,
Richard Stenzel, and Daniel van Alphen. 2003. Situated interaction with ambient information: Facilitating awareness and communication in ubiquitous work
environments. In Tenth International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI International 2003).
Citeseer.
[23] Bart van den Hooff. 2004. Electronic coordination and
collective action: use and effects of electronic calendaring and scheduling. Information & Management 42,
1 (2004), 103–114.
[24] Thomas Visser, Martijn Vastenburg, and David
Keyson. 2010. SnowGlobe: the development of a prototype awareness system for longitudinal field studies.
In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. ACM, 426–429.
[25] Daniel Vogel and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2004. Interactive public ambient displays: transitioning from implicit
to explicit, public to personal, interaction with multiple
users. In Proceedings of the 17th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology. ACM,
137–146.
[26] Torben Wallbaum, Janko Timmermann, Wilko Heuten,
and Susanne Boll. 2015. Forget Me Not: Connecting
Palliative Patients and Their Loved Ones. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 1403–1408.

1884

