alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

Data Edibilization: Representing Data
with Food
Yun Wang
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, HK
ywangch@cse.ust.hk

Qiong Luo
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, HK
luo@cse.ust.hk

Xiaojuan Ma
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, HK
mxj@cse.ust.hk

Huamin Qu
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, HK
huamin@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Data communication is critical in data science. We propose
data edibilization, i.e., encoding data with edible materials,
as a novel approach to leverage multiple sensory channels
to convey data stories. We conduct a preliminary data tasting workshop to explore how users interact with and interpret data edibilization. Based on the participants’ feedback,
we summarize the advantages of edibilization in terms of
attractiveness, richness, memorability, affectiveness, and
sociability. We also identify several challenges with data
edibilization. We discuss possible pragmatic processes, enabling technologies, and potential research opportunities to
provide insights into the design space of data edibilization
and its practicality.

Author Keywords
Data edibilization; data cuisine; information visualization;
physicalization.

ACM Classification Keywords
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CHI’16 Extended Abstracts, May 07-12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA
Copyright © 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4082-3/16/05$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892570

H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]:
Miscellaneous

Introduction
Data communication is an essential component in data science. By articulating findings and insights from data, the
values of data can be better realized. Researchers and

409

alt.chi: Food Fictions

Figure 1: A 3D-printed pastry shell
embedded with yeast, mushrooms,
edible soil, and sprouts, © Chloé
Rutzerveld [55].

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

practitioners have been experimenting with different ways
to tell stories about data [15]. Visualization is the most commonly used technique. Vision is a primary channel for humans to obtain information [21]. A concisely and meticulously designed visualization system is able to provide people with an instant understanding of the characteristics of
the data [31, 40]. The introduction of data sonification [34]
and physicalization [27] demonstrates the possibility and
potential of involving the sense of hearing and touching in
analysis and exploration of data.

widely accessible. For example, IBM Chef Watson uses
machine learning techniques to automatically generate new
recipes of flavorful dishes that suit customers’ needs and
tastes [10]. Smart cooking appliances and 3D food printers
can automate the food production process to a great extent.
They are becoming more affordable for ordinary households [59]. Attempts to use food as a data communication
medium have been made [2, 28, 29]. However, no systematic research on data edibilization has been conducted, to
the best of our knowledge.

The design space of data representation can be further expanded to include smell and taste in a compatible/harmonious
manner, making the data representation even more vivid
and memorable [52]. For example, Figure 1 shows a 3Dprinted biscuit with edible mushrooms growing in it. If this
biscuit is served as a snack at a workplace, people can
track their working hours, the temperature, and humidity in
the office by monitoring the growth of the mushroom. Employees can compare and taste mushrooms displaying the
working conditions at the end of the day. In addition, choosing seasonal, local ingredients will add cultural/regional flavor to the whole experience.

We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows:
(1) We define data edibilization as a means of presenting
data, and conduct a preliminary study in the form of a Data
Tasting Workshop to gain an in-depth understanding of the
advantages and challenges of data edibilization.
(2) We examine the different components, namely, anticipation, production, and consumption, that constitute an
integrated experience of data edibilization.
(3) We propose three design processes, namely, foodbased, data-driven, and hybrid approach to construct data
edibilization.
(4) We compare data edibilization with existing data representation methods, identify possible research opportunities,
and sketch a research agenda for the Human-Computer
Interaction community.

In this paper, we define the process or an instance of communicating data using attributes of edible materials, such
as appearance, texture, sound, taste, and smell of foods
and drinks as Data Edibilization. The definition shows that
data edibilization is related to but extends beyond food production. When we cook food, we try to make the dishes
enjoyable and nutritious. Similarly, when we “cook” data, we
leverage the rich sensory experiences and the positive psychological effects that food entails to tell an interesting story
with data, instead of merely showing numbers.
Emerging technologies have made the process of transforming data to an edible presentation easier and more

Characteristics of Data Edibilization
Data edibilization adds another layer of complexity. Designers need to consider the data-ingredient fit to create a
coherent experience. There have been some empirical exploration of data edibilization, and we divide the outcomes
into two categories.
The first style of edibilization reserves the look of an ordinary dish but with data encoded. For example, six fruit-

410

alt.chi: Food Fictions

Figure 2: The designer of Slow
Cuban Hummus used the cost of
black beans to indicate the cost of
internet usage [28], © Data
Cuisine. ( Photo by Uli Holz)

Figure 3: In Taste of Migration,
nationalities are represented by the
typical food of each country [28],
© Data Cuisine.

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

cakes (a.k.a., Christmas stollen) are used to represent a
person’s Christmas spending through the amount of nuts
and dried tropical mixes in the dessert. It is rather easy to
perceive the individual differences between each fruitcake
visually [1]. Another example in Figure 2 is to show the cost
of one minute of Internet usage in Cuba, compared with the
cost of black beans. By showing 37.5 g black beans that
cost the equivalent of one minute of Internet, people can
easily connect intangible Internet usage with tangible food.
The second style of edibilization simply reconstructs common data visualizations such as bar charts and pie charts
using food as a medium. For instance, Figure 3 is an edible
stacked bar chart showing the amount of non-Finnish people living in Finland generated in a data cuisine workshop
[28]. Nationalities of the immigrants are represented by the
typical food of each corresponding country, e.g., salmon for
the Swedish and rice for the Chinese.
To gain a better understanding of users’ perception and behaviors with different styles of edibilization, we conducted
a preliminary user study. We discuss the advantages and
challenges of this novel experience with data from subjective feedback.
Preliminary User Study
We organized a “Data Tasting Workshop” with 15 participants to compare the differences between the visualization
and edibilization of three distinct datasets.
Selected Datasets and Edibilization Design
We obtained three datasets together with the original visualizations from the Internet. The first dataset is about
employment in agriculture in four Asian countries, namely,
China, India, Japan and Korea.1 We edibilized this data as
1

Employment in agriculture. http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/3.2

savory cracker sauce, which is completely different from
the original visualization – a geographic heatmap. Particularly, we exploitd the signature sauce of each country: thick
broad-bean sauce for China, curry spread for India, wasabi
paste for Japan, and Kimchi dip for Korean (Figure 4). The
amount of sauce placed on a cracker depends on the size
of agricultural population in the corresponding country. This
edibilization is of the first style.
The second dataset compares the number of annual STEM
degree earners with the number of annual STEM job openings.2 The job opening data are from Bureau of Labor Statistics,3 which is illustrated by a bar chart. We made a garden vegetable with ham salad to encode this data (Figure 4). More specifically, the bread crumbs at the bottom
correspond to available jobs, salty ham represents associates degree/certificate holders, sweet corn kernels denote
bachelors, diced sour tomatoes refer to masters, and bitter
arugula symbolizes PhD graduates. We stacked the ingredients on top of one another in a transparent glass. The
quantity of each ingredient reflects the value of the data entry. The final edibilization looks similar to a not-yet-blended
salad, which evokes a flavor of an overlay bar chart.
The third dataset uses a pie chart to show the percentage
of Asian Americans who see themselves as “very different from" versus “the same as" typical Americans, or inbetween.4 We used the appearance of the pie chart and
replace the color patches with cheese cubes (Figure 4).
Particularly, we mapped the percentages to the colors and
tastes of the cheese: white as typical American, orange as
2
Degree data are from National Science Foundation.
http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind12/appendix.htm
3
Bureau of Labor Statistics. http://www.bls.gov/emp/
4
Asian Americans. http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/asianamericansgraphics/

411

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

the country of origin, and a mix of the two colors as biculturalism. This edibilization is of the second style.
Participants, Study Setup, and Procedure
We recruited 15 volunteers (ages ranged from 21 to 37,
M=26, SD=3.5; 3 females) via advertisements posted in a
local university for the data tasting workshop. All participants had used data visualization before.
At the beginning of the workshop, we informed the participants that we were experimenting with a new way to represent data without any specific instructions to study how
users interact with edibilization naturally. Then, the participants were free to explore the three examples we provided.
Each example consisted of a sheet of paper showing the
title and visualization of the dataset, the edibilization we
designed, and a legend plate with samples of all the ingredients used. The participants could pick up and observe the
edibilization design closely, discuss with one another, and
taste the “legend” at will (Figure 5).

Figure 4: The edibilization for
three different datasets.

We asked the participants to document their experience
and write down detailed interpretations of each edibilization. At the end of the workshop, the participants rated to
what extent edibilization is superior to visualization (or vice
versa) on different attributes. We used a bidirectional Likert
scale between -5 and 5 to measure their responses (Figure 6). We then conducted one-on-one semi-structured
interviews to learn more about the perceived characteristics
of data edibilization and its envisioned use. Based on the
ratings and interview results, we summarize the advantages
and challenges of data edibilization.
Advantages of Data Edibilization
Data edilization benefits from the psychological and behavioral effects from food.

Attractiveness
The participants of the preliminary study found data edibilization to be more attractive and attention grabbing than visualization (M = 3.8, SD = 1.37). Humans consider food as
a means of survival. Thus, people are naturally attracted to
food [12]. As time evolves, pleasant eating experiences further intensify the attentional and approach biases for food
cues [7], especially when hunger strikes [38, 57], which
is “a natural advantage (for edibilization) to attract people
(P12, male)”. Nearly all (13/15, 86.7%) of the participants
agreed on that “It was close to lunch time, and thus your
edibilizations were particularly eye/nose-catching (P14,
male).”
The initial interest in an edibilization design can further become stronger approach tendencies toward the appetitive
stimuli [7]. A total of 80% (12/15) of the participants found
edibilization to be more aesthetically pleasing (M = 1.67,
SD = 1.95), and 80% (12/15) considered edibilization to be
more fun to explore (M = 2.33, SD = 2.92) than visualization. As one participant pointed out in the interview, “The
cheese pie chart was quite straightforward, but the smell
made me want to taste the ingredients to see if there were
any hidden information (P15, female).”A palatable design
can still “leave a good, deep impression (P1, male) even if
the appearance is bland.”
Sensory Richness
The above-mentioned quote suggests that the multi-sensory
experiences triggered by food are attention catching and
can be used to encode data [12]. We divide the sensory
attributes of edible materials into two categories: 1) explicit visual-based attributes such as color, shape, and volume; and 2) implicit attributes including smell, taste, sound
and texture, which may be less precise than visual cues
[53, 30]. Designers can exploit the visual appeal of ingre-

412

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

dients to convey prominent information, such as using the
colors of cheese to denote cultural identity (Figure 4). In
our interview, 53.3% (8/15) of the participants chose “appearance” as their first choice of properties to encode data
if asked to design an edibilization.

Figure 5: The participants
observing our data edibilization.

Figure 6: Overview of the rating
results of the user study comparing
the differences between data
charts and data edibilization.

The implicit attributes can serve as carriers of secretive
or subtle messages such as emotions. As one participant
said, “I was puzzled about how the ingredients were chosen for the different (STEM) degrees. When I took a bite
of the (arugula) leaf – the representation of Ph.D. – and
tasted the bitterness, I said to myself, this is why (P6, male,
Ph.D. candidate).”Another participant wrote in her interpretation, “I notice that the texture and flavor of the white
and mixed-color cheeses are more similar compared to
the orange one. Maybe it means American and bicultural
Asians can blend into the U.S. society better than those
who maintain their ethnic identity (P10, female).” Overall,
80% (12/15) of the participants mentioned that they would
encode data with implicit attributes in an edibilization design, five of whom even chose smell and taste as the primary communication channel. As one participant proposed,
“Using various sensory attributes in conjunction to express
the same meaning can make data analysis more accessible
to visually-impaired people (P3, male).”
Intangible Richness
edibilization also contains rich intangible assets, such as
culture [5], origin, and season of production, nutrition, brand,
personal as well as social meanings, and so on. These
assets can be leveraged to tell a lively data story. For instance, using cultural labels of edible materials can naturally denote geographic information, as done in edibilizing
the agricultural employment data. One of the participants
is from Thailand. He mentioned in the interview that “it
would be even more interesting to me if you add Thailand

to the dataset and put Thai curry or fish sauce on the plate
(P11, male).” Another example is the interpretation of different ingredients in the STEM salad. Several participants
associated the bread crumbles to job openings, relating
it with the term “breadwinner”, representing social meaning. Some thought associates’ certification to be the only
“meat” among all the degrees because it could yield greater
strength and endurance for a larger population, representing nutrition. This can better engage users, induce positive
emotions, and deepen their understanding of the data, especially when users capture information encoded by the
implicit and intangible attributes. As a participant said in the
post-workshop interview, “I suddenly understood what the
designers wanted to say, which made me delighted (P2,
male).” Overall, the rich sensory and intangible features
constitute a large design space of data edibilization.
Memorability
Anthropologists have long discovered the ability of food to
stimulate some of the deepest memories [60]. More than
half (10/15, 66.7%) of the participants found the edibilization to be easier to remember than the charts on paper
(M = 1.2, SD = 2.39). Memories of an edibilization design
comprise the multi-sensory experiences triggered during
the interaction with food [60]. Such memories can be subsequently evoked by the same or similar taste and smell
[43, 44, 8]. Spherical concentric layer cake is a potential
way to teach the interior structures of the Earth and the
Jupiter using cakes.5 Learners can slice and taste the different parts of the cakes. The embodied link between the
texture and consistency of the cake layers and the actual
physical properties of the concentric layers of the two planets make the knowledge particularly memorable. Previous
5
Spherical Concentric Layer Cake.
http://cakecrumbs.me/2013/08/01/spherical-concentric-layer-caketutorial/

413

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

studies have also postulated the material and intangible cultural account of food memories [60, 35]. When we asked
the participants about what they remembered the most from
the data tasting workshop, three participants mentioned the
crackers with various sauces encoding different countries,
because of the color contrast (appearance) and the feeling
that they had captured the cultural hints intentionally embedded by the designers. This suggests that edibilization
may exert a more enduring effect than the other types of
data representations, which may potentially benefit application domains such as education and marketing.
Affectiveness
Prior research has suggested that associated emotions are
another reason why food memories are powerful and long
lasting [35]. First, people elicit more positive emotions, such
as enjoyment, desire, and satisfaction [49], than negative
affects when evoked by the experienced consequences of
everyday interactions with edible products [16, 24]. Second,
the sensory properties of food, particularly taste and smell,
can stimulate a wide variety of emotions [16]. For example, the phrase “when things go sour" implies undesirable
outcomes, while “this is really sweet” is meant to express
pleasure [5]. Third, food intake contains affective metaphorical meanings [54]. One of the participants talked about
his own experience. “In the annual retreat of the company
that I interned in, we ate the pastry with our competitors’
performance data on the inked icing. It felt like expressing our wishes to outpace our competitors and become
the leader in the market (P13, male)."Another participant
shared an envisioned scenario. “Eating my (edibilized) academic record means that I have accepted, understood, and
digested the results. I have turned the past into nutrition for
the future, and now I can let it go (P8, female).”
The emotional effects of edibilization can potentially affect

people’s behaviors and choices even long after exposure
[44]. For example, presenting 3D printed cheerful messages and emoticons encoded with physical activity data,
such as heart rate, in chocolate may encourage participation in physical activities [33].
Sociability
Food can facilitate social engagement [65, 24]. For example, family and friends enjoy chatting at dining table; dates
are often arranged at lunch and dinner time; conference attendees usually socialize during coffee breaks. During our
workshop, the edibilized representations triggered heated
discussions among the participants. One person said, “We
gathered and argued about the encoding scheme. We encouraged one another to sample the ingredients and share
thoughts on the food and the data. It felt like deciphering
some secret code together and was a lot of fun (P5, male)."
As previous studies have proposed, eating, drinking, and
food gifting are “the primary way of initiating and maintaining human relationships” [19, 45], especially when additional messages are embedded [63]. In general, 60% of the
participants thought that edibilization can better strengthen
social links than visualization (M = 0.6, SD = 1.88).
In summary, data edibilization has the potential to more
effectively grab users’ attention, stimulate positive reactions
and enduring memories, and encourage social interactions
in comparison with the other conventional data presentation
methods. However, we are also aware of the challenges of
data edibilization as reflected in the preliminary study.
Challenges of Data Edibilization
A total of 86.7% of the participants found the edibilization
to be not as easy to understand as visual charts for several
possible reasons (M = -2.5, SD = 2.39). First, the participants were postgraduate students or teachers. Thus, they
have been trained to read visual charts. By contrast, the

414

alt.chi: Food Fictions

Figure 7: The Scoville Scale is the
measurement of spiciness [18].
(© Foodies)

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

workshop was their first encounter with edibilization. Moreover, we did not provide any instructions on how to “read”
the novel designs. Second, exploiting the implicit and intangible attributes of food introduces complexity and ambiguity.
As a result, the participants sometimes felt that they might
not be able to fully capture the designers’ intent.
A total of 80% (12/15) of the participants shared their concerns with the scalability of data edibilization (M = -2.7, SD
= 2.63), because they thought edibilizing data consumes
more time, effort, and money, compared with plotting a
chart. However, we argue that the emerging enabling technologies, such as 3D printing, can ultimately lower the cost
and broaden the use of data edibilization in everyday life.
We elaborate on this in the Enabling Techniques and Technologies section. In the following subsections, we discuss
factors that might impair the efficacy of edibilization.

ing, employ existing food preservation techniques [23], or
prepare adequate backup ingredients.
Health/Sustainability Concerns and Dietary Constraints
Human beings can only intake a limited amount of food in a
short period [48]. If designers want to exhibit or test a considerable number of data edibilizations, they might need to
carefully calibrate the food list and relative portion sizes to
not stuff the users or waste too much food. Data edibilization, may raise concerns about nutrition [37]. In addition,
people may have various dietary constraints due to food allergy, health issues, culture, or religion [14]. Designers need
to tailor their work based on the needs and constraints of
the audience, ensuring that tasting their edibilization work is
a healthy practice.

Food Literacy
Food literacy originally refers to the knowledge and ability to maintain a healthy diet [46]. We borrow this term to
describe one’s knowledge about food. If users have insufficient understanding of the materials used in the edibilization design, they might not be able to capture all the
meanings and nuances of the representation. To avoid this
problem, designers should select ingredients according to
the food literacy of the target audience.

Sensory Capabilities
Humans vary in their sensitivity or tolerances to smells and
tastes, which can be further affected by physical and psychological conditions, such as aging [26], or by personal
eating habits and experiences. Designers should assign the
senses to serve different purposes that can best fit and utilize the audience’s capabilities. For example, smell is good
for attracting attention because of its pervasiveness and
endurance while taste has a wider spectrum with more distinguishable intensity levels such as the Scoville Scale for
measuring spiciness (Figure 7 [56]).

Preservation
Foods are perishable. Thus, designers must consider the
preservation of data edibilization. Some ingredients may
lose their original appearance such as apple slices turning brown, or texture, such as cookies getting soggy. To
address these concerns, designers may take contextual
conditions, such as humidity and the length of exhibition,
into consideration. They may also choose materials that are
less perishable, provide food samples exclusively for tast-

To sum up, data edibilization has its natural entrance into
people’s lives. Compared with data visualization [40, 31],
physicalization [58, 61, 27], and sonification [34, 22, 36, 47],
data edibilization has a lower barriers of broad acceptance,
and can create highly personalized experiences as well as
social interactions around data. Even with the same design,
data edibilization can convey different messages to different
users by hiding certain information from people’s eyes and
ears and only disclose it to the targeted users. Therefore,

415

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

data edibilization has its unique value and is more beneficial in certain scenarios. Although edibilization alone cannot
fulfill all the data communication tasks, and thus it is not a
replacement of visualization,physicalization, and sognification, edibilization can be used in conjunction with other
representations to provide richer experiences with data.

Pragmatic Process to Reach Data Edibilization
Thinking of how we can more easily design data edibilization of a given dataset is important. In this section, we propose three ways to realize data edibilization.
Food-based Approach: Data edibilization can be implemented by modifying the production process of common
foods and dishes. For example, if we want to present data
in a cup of coffee, we may select different coffee beans,
change the amount of milk and sugar, tailor the thickness
of foam, and serve it in various cups in accordance with the
data, the users, and the scenarios. Utilizing the mature production process of common foods makes the design and
implementation of data edibilization easier, given a confined
design space. In addition, such use can minimize the risks
of undesirable outcomes and makes performing trial and
error less costly. Hence, automating this process becomes
possible. Users may already have sufficient knowledge of
the common food chosen. Nevertheless, this food-based
approach has some obvious downsides. Its expressiveness
is limited. Thus, it may not be able to convey complex data.
Additionally, prior belief about and biases towards the selected food may hinder users’ perception and imagination.
Data-driven Approach: A different data-driven approach
aims to create novel edible representations of information,
unrestricted by existing recipes. Designers first determine
the dimensions of data that they want to convey. Then, they
search for edible materials that can serve as the carriers.

Finally, they use the selected ingredients to make a “dish”,
which may result in unexpected forms of food. Designers
taking this approach have a larger design space, allowing
them to handle more complex data. Although the resulting
design may be less familiar to users, more abstract and
difficult to understand, it may motivate people to explore.
However, this data-driven approach entails higher risks,
more decisions to make, and more trade-offs to balance.
Hybrid Approach: A third data edibilization design strategy combines the previous two methods to achieve the best
of both worlds. Designers can either reinvent traditional
dishes using non-traditional ingredients, or combine elements extracted from pre-specified cuisines to create an
original dish. This eclectic hybrid approach seeks a balance
between data and food, between feasibility and creativity.

Enabling Technologies
Recent development of technologies make it feasible to
transform data edibilization design into practice.
Intelligent Food Production in the Era of IoT
Microcomputer controlled automatic cooking appliances
turn input ingredients into dishes as programmed [11].
These cooking appliances can handle different ingredients
and can produce different dishes based on the settings.
The Internet of Things (IoT, a.k.a., the Network of Everything) more effectively connects automatic cooking appliances to their users via ubiquitous sensing and pervasive
Internet [25, 6]. This technology allows the food production
process to be directed by user data [32]. This method is
beneficial for edibilization designers taking the food-based
approach.
Data-driven Recipe Creation
Recipes are traditionally designed by professionals with adequate background knowledge about food and consumers.

416

alt.chi: Food Fictions

Figure 8: A 3D Marzipan
Skyscraper printed by 3D food
printer. (© 2015 BOCUSINI)

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) techniques enables extracting food pairing principles [4] and
automatically create new recipes. An example of such a
system is the IBM Chef Watson.6 By leveraging existing
recipes and associated knowledge of food science and food
industry, such as human taste preferences, food pairing
theories, and flavor compounds, Chef Watson is able to
use genetic algorithms to rearrange different elements, sort
through a considerable number of possibilities, and deliver
a list of creative recipes of flavorful dishes that satisfy users’
needs [62]. Such methods can be applied in the data-driven
and the hybrid approaches for data edibilization.
3D (Food) Printing
The emergence of 3D printing technology increases the
feasibility of data edibilization. In particular, 3D printing can
be made to create cooking tools and utensils for the production and consumption stages. An example is the banana slicers used as “data slicers” [1]. For another thing,
3D food printers [3, 64] make creative cooking practicable. Although still at its early stage, 3D food printing has
demonstrated its potential to tailor meals by specifying parameters such as appearance, flavor, nutrients, ingredients,
and so on [59]. For instance, the Bocusini food printer can
print 3D marzipan-skyscraper sweets (Figure 8) as well as
a wide variety of food products, such as dairy, meat, and
vegetable. 7

Research Agenda
A critical question on data edibilization is how to make the
best use of this novel way of telling data stories. We propose that Human-Computer Interaction researchers can
approach the problem from five directions, which is inspired
by existing studies in related areas [27, 34, 39].
6
7

IBM Chef Watson. https://www.ibmchefwatson.com/
Bocusini. http://www.bocusini.com/

Algorithm and Technique: One critical research problem
in edibilization is the transformation of data properties and
relations into the perceived attributes of food and drinks.
Designers may need to avoid interference between the
smells/tastes of the ingredients in the same dish, as well
as between several dishes displayed together. Moreover,
personal and contextual factors add additional complexity
to this problem [20]. These issues can be formulated as an
optimization task. The design of algorithms and techniques
for data-ingredient mapping directly determines the effectiveness of data edibilization.
Model: In addition to the design and evaluation of particular algorithms and techniques, meta-research on edibilization is necessary [51, 17, 42]. First, comprehensive
models of the design space of data edibilization in different contexts for different users can be beneficial. Second,
one can constructively propose new taxonomy of styles of
making edibilization based on existing work. Third, providing guidance on the process of generating data edibilization
can help designers thoroughly consider all aspects of user
experiences. Reflective observations and creative thinking
about the process would inspire novel, effective designs
with manageable costs.
System: Designers need system support to realize data
edibilization. With algorithms and models running in the
backend, authoring tools may help designers pick proper ingredients, simulate and compare various mapping options,
and construct a selected data recipe. Once designers settle
on an edibilization design, they can program the manufacturing systems to follow the specific production process,
transforming the corresponding ingredients into a data dish.
This process may include customizing the physical forms of
materials, such as cutting and grinding, adding proper seasoning, and applying additional treatments. All these steps

417

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

require precise control. Even so, the final product may not
turn out as planned. Therefore, a good manufacturing system should be efficient, fexible, and interactive to facilitate
fast prototyping and debugging.
Evaluation: Considering that edibilization is a novel way
to communicate data to humans, generally ordinary people,
understanding how users perceive and interact with data
edibilization is important for many reasons. Researchers
can conduct comparative studies to investigate the advantages and challenges of edibilization in comparison with
other means of data communication, such as visualization
and physicalization. A follow-up question is whether and
how edibilization can be used in conjunction with other representations to tell a better data story.
Application: Researchers and practitioners can deploy
data edibilization in various application domains. One example is the use of edibilization in marketing as an augmentation or even a replacement of conventional charts
and tables. Other possible domains include entertainment,
education, healthcare, and public relations, as proposed
by the workshop participants. Many research questions
related to edibilization applications arise. The application
scenarios should be further studied to set the criterion for
using data edibilization based on domain knowledge. Moreover, they should be studied to determine the applicability
of data edibilization and to understand how to better utilize this technique. For certain applications, designers can
also exploit virtual/augmented reality technologies [9, 41],
holographic displays [13] and digital taste and smell [50]
to further increase immersion in data edibilization. We can
even expect that data edibilization can be pervasive in daily
life. Researchers may explore the possibilities of using data
edibilization in various scenarios to make it more accessible
and widely used.

Conclusion and Future Work
In the paper, we proposed to define a new concept as “data
edibilization”, which is the use of edible materials to convey stories in data. We conducted a preliminary study to
explore people’s perception and behaviors of data edibilization, and discuss the advantages, challenges, and opportunities of this novel data representation. Then, we proposed
three strategies of edibilization design, namely, food-based,
data-driven, and an eclectic combination of these two methods. We reviewed the enabling technologies of edibilization
and highlighted the potential of data edibilization in comparison to the existing data representations such as visualization, sonification, and physicalization. We discussed
possible research directions related to data edibilization.
Our exploration of this new means of communicating data
is still at an early stage. The examples used in our preliminary study were relatively simple, which have not yet fully
demonstrated the potential of edibilization to users. As proposed in the Research Agenda section, in the future, we
plan to conduct more systematic experiments to investigate
how people interact with data edibilization, in comparison
with or in conjunction of other media, in a controlled environment or in the wild. We aim at building a platform to
facilitate (collaborative) design and production of data edibilization, and broaden its use in various application domains.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the all the reviewers who
wrote and provided helpful comments on our paper and all
the study participants for their support. This work is partially supported by the National Basic Research Program of
China (973 Program) under Grant No. 2014CB340304.

418

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

References
[1] 2014. Taste of data. Retrieved June 30, 2015
http://taste-of-data.tumblr.com/. (2014).
[2] 2016. The center for genomic gastronomy. Retrieved
December 29, 2015 http://genomicgastronomy.com/.
(2016).
[3] 3DPI. 2015. 3D printing industry. Retrieved September 2, 2015 from http://3dprintingindustry.com/food/,
(2015).
[4] Yong-Yeol Ahn, Sebastian E Ahnert, James P Bagrow,
and Albert-László Barabási. 2011. Flavor network
and the principles of food pairing. Scientific reports 1
(2011).
[5] Peter Atkins, Ian Bowler, and others. 2001. Food in
society: economy, culture, geography. Arnold, Hodder
Headline Group.
[6] Luigi Atzori, Antonio Iera, and Giacomo Morabito.
2010. The internet of things: A survey. Computer
networks 54, 15 (2010), 2787–2805.
[7] Tanya Griffiths Brendan P. Bradley Brignell, Catherine and Karin Mogg. 2009. Attentional and approach
biases for pictorial food cues: Influence of external eating. Appetite 52, 2 (2009), 299–306.
[8] Gemma Calvert, Charles Spence, and Barry E Stein.
2004. The handbook of multisensory processes. MIT
press.
[9] Julie Carmigniani, Borko Furht, Marco Anisetti, Paolo
Ceravolo, Ernesto Damiani, and Misa Ivkovic. 2011.
Augmented reality technologies, systems and applications. Multimedia Tools and Applications 51, 1 (2011),
341–377.
[10] Austin Carr. 2014. IBM’S Watson Food
Truck Brings the Supercomputer to the
Kitchen. Retrieved August 10, 2015 from
http://www.fastcompany.com/3027446/techforecast/ibms-watson-food-truck-brings-thesupercomputer-to-the-kitchen. (2014).

[11] Mario G Ceste Sr. 1989. Temperature control system
for cooking apparatus. (March 14 1989). US Patent
4,812,625.
[12] Helen Charley and Connie Weaver. 1998. Foods: a
scientific approach. Merrill.
[13] Robert Collier. 2013. Optical holography. Elsevier.
[14] Rob Comber, Eva Ganglbauer, Jaz Hee-jeong Choi,
Jettie Hoonhout, Yvonne Rogers, Kenton O’ Hara, and
Julie Maitland. 2012. Food and interaction design:
designing for food in everyday life. In CHI’12 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2767–2770.
[15] Alan R Dennis and Joseph S Valacich. 1999. Rethinking media richness: Towards a theory of media
synchronicity. In Systems Sciences, 1999. HICSS-32.
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii International
Conference on. IEEE, 10–pp.
[16] Pieter MA Desmet and Hendrik NJ Schifferstein. 2008.
Food, memory and meaning: the symbolic and social
nature of food events. Appetite 50, 2 (2008), 290–301.
[17] Tanja Döring, Axel Sylvester, and Albrecht Schmidt.
2013. A design space for ephemeral user interfaces.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction. ACM,
75–82.
[18] Pat Elk. 2013. How hot is too hot when it comes to
chillies? http://www.foodies.co.za/how-hot-is-too-hotwhen-it-comes-to-chillies/. (2013).
[19] Peter Farb and George Armelagos. 1980. Consuming passions, the anthropology of eating. Houghton
Mifflin.
[20] Ingrid C. Fedoroff, Janet Polivy, and C Peter Herman.
1997. The effect of pre-exposure to food cues on the
eating behavior of restrained and unrestrained eaters.
Appetite 28, 1 (1997), 33–47.

419

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

[21] David G. Myers and C. Nathan DeWall. 2015. Psychology, 11th Edition. Worth Publishers.
[22] William W. Gaver. 1993. What in the world do we
hear? An ecological approach to auditory event perception. Ecological Psychology 5, 1 (1993), 1–29.
[23] Grahame Warwick Gould. 2012. New methods of food
preservation. Springer Science & Business Media.
[24] Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper. 2008. Celebratory technology: new directions for food research in
HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 467–476.
[25] Jayavardhana Gubbi, Rajkumar Buyya, Slaven Marusic, and Marimuthu Palaniswami. 2013. Internet of
Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generation Computer Systems
29, 7 (2013), 1645–1660.
[26] Alessandra Imoscopi, Emine Meral Inelmen, Giuseppe
Sergi, Fabrizia Miotto, and Enzo Manzato. 2012. Taste
loss in the elderly: epidemiology, causes and consequences. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research
24, 6 (2012), 570–579.
[27] Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg,
Jason Alexander, Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram
Subramanian, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2015. Opportunities and challenges for data physicalization. In In
Proceedings of the 33nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems.
[28] Susanne Jaschko and Moritz Stefaner. 2014a. Data
cuisine. http://data-cuisine.net/, (2014).
[29] Susanne Jaschko and Moritz Stefaner. 2014b. Data
cuisine: Resources and reference projects. Retrieved
December 30, 2015 http://data-cuisine.net/resourcesand-reference-projects/. (2014).
[30] Joseph’Jofish’ Kaye. 2004. Olfactory display. In Proceedings of the 17th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology. ACM, 163–163.

[31] Daniel Keim and others. 2002. Information visualization and visual data mining. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 8, 1 (2002), 1–
8.
[32] Rohit Ashok Khot, Jeewon Lee, Deepti Aggarwal,
Larissa Hjorth, and Florian’Floyd’ Mueller. 2015a.
TastyBeats: Designing Palatable Representations of
Physical Activity. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 2933–2942.
[33] Rohit Ashok Khot, Ryan Pennings, and Florian Floyd
Mueller. 2015b. EdiPulse: supporting physical activity with chocolate printed messages. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 1391–1396.
[34] Gregory Kramer, Bruce Walker, Terri Bonebright,
Perry Cook, John H Flowers, Nadine Miner, and John
Neuhoff. 2010. Sonification report: Status of the field
and research agenda. (2010).
[35] Deborah Lupton. 1994. Food, memory and meaning:
the symbolic and social nature of food events. The
Sociological Review 42, 4 (1994), 664–685.
[36] Taram Madhyastha, Daniel Reed, and others. 1995.
Data sonification: Do you see what I hear? Software,
IEEE 12, 2 (1995), 45–56.
[37] L. Kathleen Mahan and Sylvia Escott-Stump. 2004.
Krause’s food, nutrition, & diet therapy. (2004).
[38] Karin Mogg, Brendan P Bradley, Harpfreet Hyare, and
Sui Lee. 1998. Selective attention to food-related stimuli in hunger: are attentional biases specific to emotional and psychopathological states, or are they also
found in normal drive states? Behaviour Research and
Therapy 36, 2 (1998), 227–237.

420

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

[39] Tamara Munzner. 2008. Process and pitfalls in writing
information visualization research papers. In Information visualization. Springer, 134–153.
[40] Tamara Munzner. 2014. Visualization Analysis and
Design. CRC Press.
[41] Takuji Narumi, Yuki Ban, Takashi Kajinami, Tomohiro
Tanikawa, and Michitaka Hirose. 2012. Augmented
perception of satiety: controlling food consumption by
changing apparent size of food with augmented reality.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 109–118.
[42] Marianna Obrist, Rob Comber, Sriram Subramanian,
Betina Piqueras-Fiszman, Carlos Velasco, and Charles
Spence. 2014a. Temporal, affective, and embodied
characteristics of taste experiences: A framework
for design. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2853–2862.
[43] Marianna Obrist, Alexandre N Tuch, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2014b. Opportunities for odor: experiences with
smell and implications for technology. In Proceedings
of the 32rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2843–2852.
[44] Nicole Koenig-Lewis Adrian Palmer Organ, Kate and
Jane Probert. 2015. Festivals as agents for behaviour
change: A study of food festival engagement and
subsequent food choices. Tourism Management 48
(2015), 84–99.
[45] Susan J Paxton, Helena K Schutz, Elenor H Wertheim,
and Sharry L Muir. 1999. Friendship clique and peer
influences on body image concerns, dietary restraint,
extreme weight-loss behaviors, and binge eating in
adolescent girls. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 108,
2 (1999), 255.

[46] Donna Pendergast, Susanne Garvis, and Harry
Kanasa. 2011. Insight from the public on home economics and formal food literacy. Family and Consumer
Sciences Research Journal 39, 4 (2011), 415–430.
[47] Loshak-A. Backhaus S. Davis J. C. Pereverzev, S. V.
and R. E. Packard. 1997. Quantum oscillations between two weakly coupled reservoirs of superfluid
3He. Nature 388 (1997), 449–451.
[48] University A DJ Catholique de Louuain Pharmaceutiques. 1995. Dietary modulation of the human colonie
microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics. Journal of Nutrition 125 (1995), 1401–1412.
[49] Elizabeth Taylor Quilliam. 2008. Happy meals, happy
parents: Food marketing strategies and corporate social responsibility. ProQuest.
[50] Nimesha Ranasinghe, Kasun Karunanayaka,
Adrian David Cheok, Owen Noel Newton Fernando,
Hideaki Nii, and Ponnampalam Gopalakrishnakone.
2011. Digital taste and smell communication. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Body
Area Networks. ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences,
Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering), 78–84.
[51] JC Roberts and R Walker. 2010. Using all our senses:
the need for a unified theoretical approach to multisensory information visualization. In Workshop on the
Role of Theory in Information Visualization.
[52] Jonathan C Roberts, Panagiotis D Ritsos, Sriram Karthik Badam, Dominique Brodbeck, Jessie
Kennedy, and Niklas Elmqvist. 2014. Visualization
beyond the Desktop–the Next Big Thing. Computer
Graphics and Applications, IEEE 34, 6 (2014), 26–34.
[53] Paul Rozin. 1982. “Taste-smell confusion” and the
duality of the olfactory sense. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics 31, 4 (1982), 397–401.

421

alt.chi: Food Fictions

#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA

[54] Paul Rozin. 1996. Towards a psychology of food and
eating: From motivation to module to model to marker,
morality, meaning, and metaphor. Current Directions in
Psychological Science (1996), 18–24.
[55] Chloé Rutzerveld. 2014. Edible growth. Retrieved July
1, 2015 http://www.chloerutzerveld.com/edible-growth2014/. (2014).
[56] Wilbur L Scoville. 1912. Note on capsicums. Journal of
the American Pharmaceutical Association 1, 5 (1912),
453–454.
[57] Edgar Soria-Gómez, Luigi Bellocchio, Leire Reguero,
Gabriel Lepousez, Claire Martin, Mounir Bendahmane,
Sabine Ruehle, Floor Remmers, Tifany Desprez, Isabelle Matias, and others. 2014. The endocannabinoid
system controls food intake via olfactory processes.
Nature Neuroscience 17, 3 (2014), 407–415.
[58] Simon Stusak, Aurélien Tabard, Franziska Sauka,
Rohit Ashok Khot, and Andreas Butz. 2014. Activity
sculptures: Exploring the impact of physical visualizations on running activity. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 20, 12 (2014), 2201–
2210.
[59] Jie Sun, Weibiao Zhou, Dejian Huang, Jerry YH Fuh,
and Geok Soon Hong. 2015. An Overview of 3D Printing Technologies for Food Fabrication. Food and Bioprocess Technology (2015), 1–11.

[60] David E. Sutton. 2001. Remembrance of repasts: an
anthropology of food and memory. Berg Publishers.
[61] Saiganesh Swaminathan, Conglei Shi, Yvonne
Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Lora A Oehlberg, and JeanDaniel Fekete. 2014. Supporting the design and fabrication of physical visualizations. In Proceedings of
the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in
computing systems. ACM, 3845–3854.
[62] Lav R Varshney, Florian Pinel, Kush R Varshney, Debarun Bhattacharjya, Angela Schoergendorfer, and YiMin Chee. 2013. A big data approach to computational
creativity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.1213 (2013).
[63] Jun Wei, Xiaojuan Ma, and Shengdong Zhao. 2014.
Food messaging: using edible medium for social
messaging. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2873–2882.
[64] Kyle Wiggers. 2015. Why 3D food printing is more
than just a novelty. Retrieved July 8, 2015 from
http://www.digitaltrends.com/cool-tech/3d-foodprinters-how-they-could-change-what-you-eat/,
(2015).
[65] L Wright, M Hickson, and G Frost. 2006. Eating together is important: using a dining room in an acute
elderly medical ward increases energy intake. Journal
of Human Nutrition and Dietetics 19, 1 (2006), 23–26.

422

