EdiPulse: Investigating a Playful Approach to
Self-monitoring through 3D Printed Chocolate Treats
Rohit Ashok Khot1, Deepti Aggarwal2, Ryan Pennings1,
Larissa Hjorth3, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller1
1
2
3
Exertion Games Lab
Interaction Design Lab,
RMIT University,
RMIT University, Australia
University of Melbourne, Australia
Australia
{rohit, ryan, floyd}@
daggarwal@student.unimelb.edu.au larissa.hjorth@rmit.edu.au
exertiongameslab.org
ABSTRACT

Self-monitoring offers benefits in facilitating awareness
about physical exercise, but such data-centric activity may
not always lead to an enjoyable experience. We introduce
EdiPulse a novel system that creates activity treats to offer
playful reflections on everyday physical activity through
the appealing medium of chocolate. EdiPulse translates
self-monitored data from physical activity into small 3D
printed chocolate treats. These treats (< 20 grams of
chocolate in total) embody four forms: Graph, Flower,
Slogan and Emoji. We deployed our system across 7
households and studied its use with 13 participants for 2
weeks per household. The field study revealed positive
aspects of our approach along with some open challenges,
which we disseminate across five themes: Reflection,
Positivity, Determination, Affection, and Co-experience.
We conclude by highlighting key implications of our work
for future playful food-based technology design in
supporting the experience of being physically active.
Author Keywords

Physical activity; chocolate printing; self-monitoring; food
printing; quantified self; human food interactions.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

The growing popularity of self-monitoring devices [56,62]
is contributing to a wider availability of previously
inaccessible physical activity data, such as an individual’s
heart rate, but we know only little about how, and for what
purposes, this data could and should be used. Currently, this
data is mainly used to increase awareness about an
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific
permission
and/or
a
fee.
Request
permissions
from Permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2017, May 06 - 11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05!$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025980

.

individual’s physical activity levels and to support
motivation for increasing physical activity. Moreover,
numbers and graphs are predominantly used to visualize
this data [18]. To this end, an active lifestyle is perceived as
a eudaimonic pursuit [63] where the emphasis is on
improving athletic performance through rational selfanalysis. However, multiple recent studies [23,24,73,85]
report that the use of numbers and graphs might only offer a
limited view on the rich experience of being physically
active. Quantification might be useful in bringing
awareness to exercise, but this “number crunching” activity
may not always lead to an enjoyable experience [23,25].
Hassenzahl et al. [37] raise concern that in the long run,
numbers could make exercise feel like work, and we need
better, richer ways to represent this data. We agree with
these notions and wonder if we could make self-monitoring
a more playful experience that embraces the rich qualities
of living an active lifestyle. For instance, instead of “boring
users to death with numbers” [36], we ask, what if we turn
this data into something more delightful like chocolate?
We present EdiPulse that translates physical activity data
into 3D printed activity treats (Figure 1). These treats are
created from 20 grams of dark chocolate and embody four
forms: Graph, Flower, Slogan and Emoji. This quantity
remains the same irrespective of the amount of physical
activity done by the user. Instead, their representations
become more gratifying with more physical activity.

Figure 1: Activity treats come in four different forms:
Graph, Flower, Slogan and Emoji.

Our interest in chocolate stems from its rich multisensorial
appeal and ability to bring sheer pleasure from its moderate
consumption [15,55]. Besides, studies also report that
eating moderate amounts of dark chocolate daily is good for
cardiovascular health [1], for improving cognitive abilities
[21] and helping in post-exercise recovery [2]. We aim to
capitalize on these aspects to offer vivid ways of engaging
with one’s data. We also choose emerging 3D food printing
technology [84] to alter the shape of chocolate in unique
and creative ways based on digital data. Printing chocolate
also creates a sweet aroma of warm chocolate that further
adds to the evocative experience. However, we are also
aware that chocolate is a calorie laden food and its over
consumption could cause weight gain, although research
findings on this topic are inconclusive [27]. As such, we do
not advocate eating chocolate or its usefulness to health, but
rather use it to unfold a playful approach to self-monitoring.
We conducted in-the-wild field deployments [72] of the
EdiPulse system across 7 households and studied its use
with 13 participants for 2 weeks per household. We found
that despite any negative connotations that chocolate might
carry in relation to physical activity, participants did not
find activity treats as counterproductive to their fitness
goals. Rather, these treats brought positivity and
determination towards leading an active lifestyle.
This research makes the following contributions: 1) By
presenting EdiPulse, we introduce HCI to the opportunity
of combining self-monitoring with playful food based
technology design to embrace the rich qualities of living an
active lifestyle. 2) We contribute first conceptual design
understanding of the interrelationship between physical
activity and chocolate by presenting a descriptive account
on the design and adaptation of the EdiPulse system. 3)
Finally, we offer 4 key implications of our work to guide
future explorations in creating playful self-monitoring
systems with food.
RELATED WORK

Identifying different ways to represent data has always been
an area of interest within HCI. The majority of the existing
works however is centered on on-screen visualization
techniques. Few works have looked into abstract form of
visualizations using metaphors of a garden [19],
informative art [26] and aquatic ecosystem [51]. For
example, in the Fish’n’Steps system [51], an individual’s
step count is mapped to an animated fish, which becomes
happy or sad based on the number of steps taken by the
user. Systems like Health Mashup [8] and Habito [32]
provide textual feedback on self-monitored data, whereas
prior works have also explored gamification techniques [9,
90] to make physical activity playful. For example, Heart
Burn [91] is a digital car racing game where the real-time
heart rate data influence the car’s speed in the game, while
Walsh and Golback [87] have converted user’s steps to a
currency that can be spent within an online explorer game.

Recently there has also been an interest in incorporating
other senses such as touch, sound and taste to increase the
effectiveness of feedback [66]. To this end, areas like data
physicalization [40], data sonification [6,65] and data
edibilization [88] have emerged. We previously designed
and studied 3D printed representations of physical activity
data [45,83] while Lee et al. [49] created a Patina
Engraving System that represents physical activity data
through engraved patina like patterns on a wristband. We
situate our work in the area of data edibilization [88],
which considers the positive psychological effects of food
to offer rich multisensory experiences of narrating an
interesting story with edible data.
Food has a rich cultural and social history. Its preparation
and consumption provides opportunities for bonding and
interaction among individuals [15,55]. French gastronome
Brillat-Savarin [12] notes that pleasures associated with
eating and drinking constitute some of the life’s most
enjoyable experiences. Drawing on this, several works
within HCI have started exploring food as a celebratory
technology [33]. Resner introduced the concept of Edible
User Interface (EUI) that utilize the multi-sensory
experience of food to create novel interfaces such as
TasteScreen, where users interact with a system by licking
liquid residue of different flavors that driped onto the LCD
screen [57]. Murer et al. [59] designed LOLLio, a gustatory
interface for playing games. Qkies [71] is a system that
embeds QR codes on cookies, while Meta Cookie [64] is an
augmented reality based system that controls nutritional
intake by changing the perceived size of the food through a
head-mounted display. Chocolate Machine [43] is another
interesting system that dispenses a chocolate at scheduled
intervals to improve user’s self-control. These works have
explored the playful side of food based interactions [17,81],
but not necessarily in relationship with an active lifestyle,
which we consider as a missed opportunity.
Food shares an interesting relationship with physical
activity. We exercise to expend energy and we need food to
replenish the loss of energy. The relation also works the
other way around where we exercise to burn the calories
gained from consuming too much food. With today’s
sensing technologies, if we can now measure how much
exercise we have done, then what would happen if we relate
this to the kind of food we eat? Khot et al. [46] worked on
this idea to design TastyBeats that provides users with
personalized sports drinks, where the quantity and flavor is
based on the amount of exercise a user has done in a day.
The accompanying study highlighted that having an
engaging process and consumable material contributed a
playful experience while offering benefits in terms of
facilitating social interactions and self-expression. We take
this concept forward and look beyond liquids to translate
data into food. However, instead of making direct mappings
between energy spent and food [47], we chose to use a
more artistic rendering of the data in a food material with
which most share an affective relationship: chocolate!

EDIPULSE

EdiPulse stands for Edible Pulse. EdiPulse translates heart
rate data into 3D printed chocolate treats (Figure 2). We
refer to these 3D printed chocolates as activity treats, as
they come in a moderate amount and offer a unique playful
representation of one’s physical activity data.
EdiPulse uses a Polar heart rate monitor [69] and its
accompanying smartphone app to record heart rate data.
The EdiPulse application downloads heart rate data from
the Polar web site and then parses this XML data to identify
heart rate zones within the recorded data. The application
takes an average of every 10 minutes of recorded heart rate
data. If this value is above 65% percent of the maximum
heart rate, the application considers those 10 minutes as
active time, in accordance with The American College of
Sports Medicine [3] guidelines. The system then uses this
information to algorithmically construct the four activity
treats using OpenJSCAD [68] software. We discuss the
rationale behind these choices in the next section.
Flower: (Max. size (mm): 60 × 60 × 2. Avg. print time: 3
min.) Flower provides a summary of physical activity
across each hour of recording. Each petal of the Flower
corresponds to an hour and its length denotes the amount of
physical activity in that particular hour. The Flower does
not explicitly indicate the starting hour, as we wanted the
Flower to be ambiguous [31], allowing participants to
identify the starting hour on their own.
Slogan: (Max. size (mm): 160 × 120 × 2. Avg. print time: 5
min.) Slogan makes a cheerful comment about physical
activity done by the user in a day. For example, if the user
has been inactive during the day, then the Slogan will
contain motivating words that communicate the benefits of
an active lifestyle as shown in Figure 2.c and 2.d. On the
other hand, if the user has been active, then the Slogan will
offer praise through gratifying words; an example can be
seen in Figure 2.a and 2.b.

Figure 2: Participants received a different Slogan each day
based on their activity.

Emoji: (Max. size (mm): 40 × 40 × 2. Avg. print time: 2
min.) Emoji communicates an individual’s progress towards
a self-selected activity goal through an emoticon.

At the start of the day, users can enter their physical activity
goal for the day into the EdiPulse application. This goal is a
chosen duration for doing moderate to high level of
physical activity and it could span over the day. The Emoji
bears one of four faces: sad face, straight face, happy face
and super happy face based on how close one gets to the set
goal. For example, achieving and exceeding the goal
respectively results in a happy and super happy Emoji,
while failing to meet the goal results in a sad or straight
face Emoji as shown in Table 1.
Time spent exercising
(in relation to the set
activity goal)
Received Emoji

0–
50 %

51 –
99%

100%

>100%

Table 1: In Emoji, an individual’s progress towards their
activity goal is communicated through different emoticons.

Graph: (Max. size (mm): 180 × 60 × 2. Avg. print time: 3
min.) Graph shows recorded heart rate values over time.
We map the recorded heartbeat per minute to a point in XY
space and then extrude the resultant 2D shape along the zaxis to achieve a suitable thickness of 2 mm.
DESIGN PROCESS

The final designs of the activity treats were the results of
many explorations, developments and printing trials that
spanned over a year. We held five focus group discussions
with experts of different academic backgrounds from a
local research community to help us in refining our design
choices and to gather diverse perspectives on the
relationship between food and physical activity. Due to the
space limitation, we only discuss the key design decisions.
Choosing the process (Why food printing?)

When we started this work, the first thing we explored was
the process to create activity treats. Wang et al. [88]
suggested that there are three ways to encode data in food:
1) Food based approach, where the existing process of
creating food is slightly altered but keeping the recipes and
the look of the food intact. For example, artworks like datacuisine [41] fall into this category, where different foods are
arranged in a particular manner to signify a certain data
insight. 2) Data-driven approach, which takes the liberty of
experimenting with the recipes and allows new forms of
food to emerge as a result. Here, the focus is on the data
and no so much on the food. 3) Hybrid approach where
both approaches are combined to reinvent traditional dishes
with new ingredients or methods. We follow the third
approach to create activity treats using food printing.
We choose food printing [84] (instead of any traditional
methods of cooking) because it offers a way to connect
digital information with food relatively easy. Food printing
follows an additive manufacturing process where an object
is created by placing the edible material (currently in the
form of a paste, extruded using a syringe) layer by layer
until the object, based on a 3D model, is fully formed.

Food printing has been used to create smooth easy-to-eat
food for the elderly who have difficulty swallowing food
[78] and also as a social food-based messaging system [89].
However, to the best of our knowledge, there has not been
any exploration on using food printing to support the
physical activity experience.
Choosing the material (Why chocolate?)

From the start, we were quite keen on using chocolate as a
material to create activity treats, despite the negative
connotation it can carry with it. We wanted a material that
could add playfulness and intrigue to this idea of ‘selfmonitoring and then eating the data based on the sensed
activity’, hence chocolate was a suitable choice.
Choosing the amount (How much chocolate?)

We carefully choose not to map the exact amount of
calories burnt during an exercise to the amount of printed
chocolate, acknowledging the issues related with
overconsumption of chocolate. We rather focused on
making the treats more beautiful with an increase in the
amount of physical activity. We also used dark chocolate
and kept its quantity to a maximum of 20 grams a day.
Choosing the representations

We started by exploring the literature [18,20,30,52,63,90]
and took into account findings from earlier studies
[8,9,32,45,46,48,73] to identify possible representations for
activity treats. The technical capabilities of current food
printers [16] also influenced the selection. For example,
current food printers cannot print tall structures easily. As a
result, we restricted our design explorations to rather flat
models. We also considered the printing time, chocolate
amount, and the size of the print bed (20cm × 22cm) for
print efficiency. We drew on Nicolson’s [63] suggestion to
provide a variety of representations to raise the chances that
each participant can find something meaningful in the data.
Drawing on goal-setting theory [52], we also allowed
individuals to set their activity goals and used activity treats
to display progress towards it.
The final selection was based on the design strategies
suggested by Mols et al. [60] as follows: 1) Information
driven reflection: This form of reflection represents data
without any prescribed interpretation. We chose Graph and
Flower to help people understand how their activities
change over time and how they progressed towards their
goals. Representations of this form have been studied in
earlier works [19,45]. 2) Expression driven reflection: This
form of reflection adds a subtle interpretation of data using
familiar metaphors and expressions. Metaphors are believed
to be more engaging, motivating and easy to interpret [51].
Drawing inspiration from this, we chose Emoji to give users
the ability to reflect and identify themselves in alter egos.
Emojis have been previously studied in the literature
[39,42,77]. 3) Dialogue driven reflection: This form of
reflection offers textual feedback on data. Textual feedback
often comes in the form of a praise or positive
encouragement. It is also less ambiguous and directs

attention to important information [32]. Textual feedback
has been explored in earlier research [8,32]. We chose
Slogan to explicitly acknowledge an individual’s exercise
efforts and to cheer them towards their fitness goals.
However, we kept Slogan short in length considering the
size of the print bed (20cm × 22cm) and the amount of
chocolate (20 grams) required to print.
Managing the printing process

We used a ChocEdge [16] 3D printer to print the activity
treats. During the exploration, we found that chocolate, as a
print material, requires care and attention in terms of
printing. For a good quality print, the temperature of the
tempered chocolate and room should be in the range of 2532°C [50]. Extensive tempering of the chocolate results in
watery prints (Figure 3.c), whereas air bubbles in the
syringe also affect the quality of the print (Figure 3.d). We
also explored different ways to simplify the printing process
for our study participants. We tried attaching custom fans
and cold plates to the printer so that the chocolate hardens
quickly after printing. However, these alterations did not
give consistent results. As a remedy, we gave participants a
food thermometer for an accurate tempering of the
chocolate and asked them to maintain the temperature of
the room in the range of 25-32°C during printing.
Another challenge was the removal of the printed chocolate
from the print bed. We tried printing chocolate onto
different food materials such as bread and biscuits but the
printing results were inconsistent. Hence, we used a flat
acrylic sheet with a baking paper attached with bulldog
clips as a print surface. The baking paper allowed easy
removal of the cooled chocolate. Figure 3 provides the
three-step preparation before printing activity treats.

Figure 3: The chocolate printing preparation process:
a) tempering b) filling syringe c) setting up the print bed.
Concealing digital display and ad-hoc printing method

We used Printrun [70] program, to drive the printer. Under
normal settings, this program displays a 3D replica of the
object currently being printed on the screen. However, we
altered the program settings to conceal the digital display of
the activity treats. Our intention was to keep the treats as a
surprise so that they are revealed directly on the print bed in
edible form.
We also orchestrated the printing to keep users engaged in
the printing process. For example, Slogan was printed in an
ad-hoc manner, where letters from different words (within a
Slogan) were printed randomly. To elaborate, a word
‘Sweat’
would
be
printed
progressively
as:
_ _ _ _t " _ _e_t " _ _ eat "_weat "Sweat.

EDIPULSE IN ACTION (FIELD STUDY)

We conducted an in-the-wild [72] study to understand the
role of activity treats in supporting everyday physical
activity. The study took place in 7 households across
Melbourne, Australia. The recruitment followed a
snowballing method. There was no financial compensation.
Table 2 provides the demographic details of each household
(H) of 13 participants (gender, age) along with their
physical activity goal for each day of the study.
H1

Harry (M, 31, 30 min.)

Fiona (F, 27, 30 min.)

H2

Josh (M, 44, 30 min.)

Karen (F, 45, 45 min.)

H3

Adam (M, 27, 30 min.)

Helena (F, 28, 1 hour)

H4

Rohan (M, 32, 45 min.)

Diya (F, 28, 45 min.)

H5

Gavin (M, 27, 1 hour)

Daisy (F, 26, 45 min.)

H6

Jayden (M, 24, 45 min.)

Sarah (F, 28, 1 hour)

H7

Frank (M, 52, 45 min.)

Table 2: Participants’ details (names changed) along with
their activity goal.

We decided to engage more than one person from the same
household to understand social dynamics around the use of
EdiPulse. Frank’s roommate Kelly also wanted to
participate in the study, but she had to cancel last minute.
Since Frank was very enthusiastic about the study, we
allowed him to be a solo participant. As we only had access
to one printer, we proceeded with a sequential order of
installing the EdiPulse system in different households.
Overall, the deployments took more than 4 months.
The lead author visited each household on the first and last
day of the study and spent around 4 hours in total in each
household. On the first day, he explained the study
procedure with a demonstration of how to use the system.
He provided each participant with the necessary supplies
along with an instructional manual. The initial meeting with
participants was also used to gain an understanding of their
active lifestyle. Study participants self-rated themselves as
moderately active doing physical activity at least 2-3 times
a week. None of the participants were obese and neither had
a desire to change their behavior. However, they wanted to
add consistency to their exercise routine. Ten participants
had used self-monitoring devices but not for a long time.
Nine participants were fond of chocolate.
Participants performed the following tasks on each day: 1)
Morning Tasks: Participants put on the heart rate monitor
and started recording data using the Polar Beat app,
installed on the iPod Touch. Once the recording started,
participants continued their day as usual while carrying the
iPod. 2) Evening Tasks: Participants stopped the recording
around 6pm. Their heart rate data then automatically synced
to the Polar website. We downloaded the data from the
website and prepared the 3D models of activity treats using
the EdiPulse application. We then emailed the 3D models

as a single print file (.gcode) to the participants. We kept
the task of 3D modeling on our side to reduce participants’
workload and to keep the activity treats as a surprise. After
receiving the files, participants followed the steps outlined
in Figure 3 to print their treats. The preparation took around
15 minutes while the printing took an average of 13
minutes.
Data source and analysis

Interviews were conducted at the participant’s home on the
last day of study and took about 45 minutes per participant.
We kept the nature of the interviews semi-structured in
order to leave sufficient room for topics to emerge, and to
support a deeper elucidation of participants’ responses and
thinking processes. During each interview, we carried a list
of questions (topic guide) related to the research aims that
helped us to remain on track, while leaving sufficient
flexibility in the discourse. The questions revolved around
the motivations, expectations, utility and experiences of
using EdiPulse. We also gathered participants’ feedback on
system design, use of chocolate and food printing to
represent data. Additionally, we welcomed opportunities to
discuss any photographs and recordings of their interactions
with EdiPulse that participants voluntarily captured during
the course of study. This additional data helped us to
investigate how people reacted and integrated the EdiPulse
into their everyday life.
All interviews were audio recorded. During the study, we
also maintained contact with all study participants via email
and phone, to provide technical support whenever needed.
We utilized inductive thematic analysis [11] to analyze the
collected data. We examined the interview notes to get an
initial sense of recurring themes and then inductively coded
the interview data by developing labels to describe the
phenomena. After deriving the set of codes, we iteratively
clustered related codes into higher-level groupings,
representing the major themes as findings.
FINDINGS

The study identified five overarching themes: Reflection,
Positivity, Self-determination, Affection and Co-experience.
Edible component of activity treats (chocolate) was a
standout element across all themes and the majority of the
findings. However, we also narrate findings related to the
choice of representations as well as printing process, as they
played an influential role in making EdiPulse a pleasurable
experience. We use participants’ quotes to exemplify the
collected their experiences with EdiPulse.
T1: Reflection

Following reflective informatics [7], this theme describes
how activity treats allowed participants to step back and
think about their everyday life experiences. In particular,
the use of chocolate, serendipity of representations and
delayed feedback not only challenged individual’s
perception of their active life but also made the experience
enjoyable.

EdiPulse facilitated reflection on physical activities

Participants used the EdiPulse system to reflect on their
daily routines. For most participants, the study was an “eyeopener” of their level of physical fitness. Rohan reflected:
“It was a clash of realities, when I saw a sad Emoji, I felt,
‘God dammit, is this me?’ I have to do more exercise.”
Adam similarly was sad to realize the kind of sedentary life
he is living. He said with a sigh: “When I was younger I had
a very active lifestyle, these days I am more sedentary in
comparison. I need to kick off my activities a bit more.”
Edible treats made feedback enjoyable

All participants felt that the edible component enriched the
experience of reflecting on one’s data. Harry compared his
previous experience of a cycling app with EdiPulse: “I used
to check the distance and speed using an app. But my
interaction with the app stopped there, it did not go any
further. Now with EdiPulse, I got a chocolate printed
'Emoji', totally different than the numbers and much more
pleasing to the heart. And who would say no to chocolate!”
Daisy added, “It’s unbelievable that EdiPulse not only tells
you how much exercise you have done through different
shapes, but you get to eat those shapes too.”
Activity treats offered more time to reflect

Five participants liked the fact that activity treats are
printed physically and not simply shown on the screen.
Samantha pointed out, “Today, we are bombarded with
messages through Twitter and other social feeds and you
get very used to not paying attention to them, if they are not
meaningful for you. Here there was direct meaning in the
writing, so you probably stop and look at them more.” Josh
said: “I like the way it uses the chocolate instead of digital
screens to display data. It takes me away from the screens,
where I spend most of my time due to work anyway.”
Slogan added serendipity to the process of reflection

Participants compared the EdiPulse system to a fortune
cookie where one is intrigued to know the message. Karen
liked the way the system prints Slogan, “I enjoyed the
writing, getting a new motivational Slogan every day meant
a lot to me.” Josh added: “We kind of knew whether we
will get a happy 'Emoji' or what will be the shape of the
‘Graph’ at the end of the day, but Slogan always offered
something new.” Guessing the right Slogan was a
challenging but exciting activity. Frank mentioned, “I loved
watching the Slogan getting printed. The system keeps on
adding alphabets [letters], and like a small child, I keep on
guessing it [laughing].” Most participants found that
Slogan had more appeal when the message was positive and
reflected interesting things about their life.
Activity treats offered summary of the day at a glance

Six participants liked the selection of representations, which
offered them a quick summary of their day. For Adam and
Daisy, the Graph was essential to identify and reflect on
their activities. Daisy said: “I like how it really shows the
ups and downs. It is really expressive. You look at it and
you can recollect what happened during the day.” Emoji on

the other hand, was treated like a report card. Helena was
happy that “In the evening, when I see a happy Emoji, I feel
that I did a good job.” Gavin and Daisy liked how Flower
petals effectively communicate sedentary and active hours
by varying their length. Frank compared the Flower petals
to sunrays, “When I do exercise, I feel like the sun is
smiling for me and blessing me with longer rays (petals of
the ‘Flower’).”
T2: Positivity

This theme talks about the positive influence of activity
treats. Activity treats became celebratory rewards to support
individual’s activity goals and the printing process created
avenues for pleasure, creativity and nostalgia [33,35].
At first chocolate felt counterproductive

Six participants felt initially that chocolate can be
counterproductive to their exercise efforts but as they used
the system on a daily basis, they were surprised to see the
positivity and fun that it brought to their exercise. Gavin
explained how his perception towards chocolate changed
over the course of the study: “I was initially skeptical over
the chocolate, but now I realized that exercise becomes
more fun with chocolate and a little bit of chocolate does
not harm anyone”. Sarah had similar thoughts: “You
normally think you should not have chocolate if you are
doing exercise, but getting a moderate amount of chocolate
was kind of good that it broke the barrier.”
Activity treats were considered as celebratory rewards

For nine participants, activity treats was a prize that they
earned for being physically active. Fiona liked the use of
chocolate as a celebratory reward for her efforts, she
explained: “Food is an important part of the celebration.
We often reward ourselves by going to restaurants to
celebrate, and what can be better than a chocolate to
cherish my 40 minutes run!”
The amount of chocolate felt appropriate

All participants appreciated receiving the same amount of
chocolate every day irrespective of how active they were on
each day. Helena commented: “Having an edible reward is
good, but you can really get cheeky with it like you burned
2000 calories and here is 2000 calories in return. But I like
that the system is not tailored in that way.” Jayden similarly
said: “I kind of liked that it gave me a small reward or
energy for the next day’s exercise. It was not a lot but just
enough to put a smile on my face and to keep me motivated
to exercise.”
Thinner forms of chocolate supported guilt-free eating

Three participants found eating activity treats quite
different to eating a solid block of chocolate because of the
thin size (2mm in height). Interestingly, four participants
felt that eating this way was more fun because it diminished
their guilt of eating chocolate. Daisy said: “It is because of
this arrangement, so when you are eating it, you feel the
flavor but you do not feel that you are eating a lot of
chocolate, not in the way that will make you guilty or
something.” (Figure 4.a)

All participants also wanted to avoid getting a sad face
Emoji. In consequence, they tried to be more active. For
example, Diya received a straight face Emoji for two
subsequent days, which was disappointing for her. She said,
“Through the study I learned that you have to go an extra
mile to get a happy smiling Emoji.”
Figure 4: a) Thinner forms of chocolate were fun to eat. b)
Participants did another round of print to get perfect treats.

Contextual Slogan encouraged more activity

Eleven participants found the printing sound quite pleasant.
Besides the sound, they also enjoyed the sweet smell of the
warm chocolate during the printing process. Frank, who
sometimes did the printing during the morning, exemplified
this best when he said: “My roommate Kelly commented
that it was the first time ever she woke up with the smell of
chocolate, which she liked a lot. It gave both of us the
motivation to start an active day with a smile”.

When participants fell short of their desired goal, the
EdiPulse system delivered Slogans like “The gym is waiting
for you”. All participants liked such encouragements and
reminders and often did more exercise the next day. Daisy
said, “The EdiPulse system really helped me to create a
routine. Now I regularly go to the gym. I think I badly
needed that kind of push. I am really happy that I got the
kick now”. Josh changed his everyday routine by reflecting
on the activity treats: “Now, I walk more during the day.
When I go out for lunch, I walk and take stairs.”

Printing new treats every day was exciting

EdiPulse served as an ambient reminder to be active

Printer qualities made the experience evocative

Adam compared the printing process with chocolate molds
and found that printing offers more excitement: “There is
an element of personality that comes through printing, and
it is really good. You know that this chocolate is from my
data and no one is getting the same data. As a motivational
tool, if I had got the same mold as yesterday, I would
already know what’s coming, it’s no longer a mystery.”
EdiPulse offered a sense of ownership on data

Despite the preprocessing and printing troubles, participants
enjoyed printing their activity treats at home. Harry said:
“Printing at home is great, since it is edible, I like to eat it
fresh at home, just after the printing.” Daisy added, “When
you print at home, you have the freedom of choosing the
moment, when you want to print and feel rewarded”.
Jayden added, “The best part is there is no middle man who
says here is your print, so I felt some sense of ownership.”
T3: Determination

This theme talks about motivational qualities offered by
activity treats towards fulfilling activity goals of an
individual. To participants, activity treats were not just a
hedonistic gloss of chocolate. Activity treats also became
the motivational anchors and fueled enthusiasm towards an
active lifestyle. In pursuit, participants achieved their goals
76% of the time. Interestingly, activity treats also made
participants more aware about their chocolate eating habits
and they consumed activity treats only on active days.
Activity treats became motivational anchors

Besides the “feel-good” factor, nine participants found
activity treats as a motivational anchor to achieve their
desired goals. The Emoji was the favorite activity treat for
all participants. Gavin emphasized: “For me the Emoji was
the strongest motivator, others were nice too but for me the
Emoji was sufficient.” Karen similarly described her
affection towards the chocolate-coated Emoji by saying:
“Receiving a smiling Emoji feels like someone liking your
photo on Instagram. It’s a nice encouraging thing for the
day.” Frank was happy that he could also eat such Emoji.

Participants felt that the presence of the system in their
kitchen worked as a constant reminder to remain active.
Sarah said: “It is not easy to turn away from it if it is sitting
on the kitchen bench printing delicious chocolate and
reminding you to do exercise. A mobile app can be a bit of
a fad: you use it for a while and then you don’t.” Diya
similarly said, “I feel like I am answerable to this machine.
Even when I am outside, I kind of hear the printing sound
and smell of chocolate that reminds me of my activity goal.”
To this end, the physical presence of a food-printing system
installed in the kitchen facilitated an ambient awareness and
a responsibility to become physically active.
Activity treats were consumed only on deserving days

Interestingly, participants’ eating behavior was influenced
by the content of the treats. For example, five participants
did not eat their activity treats on days when they received
the sad face Emoji. Instead, they ate the chocolate only on
days when they received happy or super happy Emoji to
celebrate their success. Diya said, “It was challenging at
first not to eat the chocolate, but I was determined to
achieve my goal on the next day, which I did.” It was
interesting to see that participants engaged with the data
even if they were not happy with their performance.
Activity treats were reprinted to get deserving treats

Print results were not always consistent. Sometimes
because of the air bubbles in the syringe (Figure 4.b), the
treats did not print as expected, which annoyed most of the
participants. Jayden said: “It was quite disappointing to see
the prints becoming messy. If EdiPulse does not print it
correctly, you feel like you haven’t done the task properly.”
Interestingly, most participants did another round of
printing to get satisfactory and good looking treats. Diya
said: “Getting perfectly printed activity treats made me
happy. Receiving messy prints felt like the system is angry
on me and punishing me with bad prints.”

Activity treats reduced consumption of chocolate

All female study participants were fond of chocolate, but
EdiPulse helped them in controlling their temptation. Daisy
said: “Although chocolate was so accessible, you also knew
that every night you would have a bite of chocolate. And
when I did not exercise, I knew from the system that my
body did not ask me to eat more chocolate. So it really
made me eat less chocolate than what I normally do.”
Delayed feedback prompted more activity during the day

The printing schedule was designed to deliver the activity
treats at the end of the day. Participants appreciated such a
delayed but fixed time of feedback to print their activity
treats: “The first thing I want to do after I am back from the
office is to print my treats. I want to see if I have done
enough to get a smiling Emoji, or a long petal Flower.” For
Diya, the anticipation of the deserving treat kept her active
throughout the day: “It is hard to guess correctly if you
have done enough exercise to get a smiling Emoji, so you
often do more exercise than what you normally do.”
T4: Affection

This theme describes participants’ personal affection with
EdiPulse, where activity treats were considered as objects
of self-esteem and pride.
Activity treats were rarely shared but never wasted

Eleven participants never shared the activity treats with
others. Helena said: “It was a personal reward for what I
have done. I would not give it to others since I did all the
hard work. I know, it sounds really bad but I kept these
treats to myself.” Jayden similarly commented, “Food is
generally shared, but once it has data elements to it, it
becomes more personal.”
Sharing of activity treats only happened to prevent any
wastage of chocolate. Samantha created chocolate bunnies
from the leftover chocolate: “I love chocolate, and I can not
see someone wasting it. I will probably gift these bunnies to
my friends.” At Karen and Josh’s home their son mostly ate
activity treats from Josh’s data. Josh explained: “I suppose,
I am concerned over the wastage of syringes, plastics, and
the paper, but it’s good that the chocolate is never wasted.
Even if I do not eat it, my son would eat it.”

Figure 5: Participants enjoyed the printing process.
Enthusiasm for EdiPulse persisted despite the printing labor

All participants found the preparation steps time
consuming: “Loading the syringe and setting up the printer
was kind of labor work that one should do to get their
activity treats.” Helena echoed similar concerns: “The
preparation needs to be faster and easier.” Harry pointed
out that besides being time-consuming the process
sometimes also caused a mess: “Many times when I
tempered the chocolate, I got chocolate all over my fingers,
which by the way was not a bad thing (laughing).” As such,
eating was a part of engaging with the printing process.
Getting activity treats was dearly missed (post-study)

The first author met Gavin ten days after the end of the
study. Gavin said how much he misses the system: “I was
so habitual to the system that gave me sweet rewards for my
exercise - now I miss all that. There is no reward waiting
for me in the evenings now. The other day I had a very
active day and I was really missing my sweet treats, so I
created some treats for myself and Fiona from the leftover
chocolate.” (Figure 6.a) Adam felt the absence of EdiPulse
in his home.

Participants enjoyed the chocolate printing process

Participants particularly enjoyed standing next to the printer
and guessing, “what the printer is telling tonight”, as
explained by Frank (Figure 5). Josh added: “Because of the
nature of the machine, you keep watching it doing the print.
It is a much nicer process to see how it reveals my data as
opposed to directly knowing what it is going to say.”
Three participants voluntarily took photographs of the
printing process and affectionately shared them on different
social media. For them, the experience of watching the print
and taking photographs was nothing short of a thrill. Karen
said with a smile, “Taking photographs of the print raised
my heart rate and in that way I am burning more calories, I
wished I had the monitor on”.

Figure 6: a) Gavin manually created activity treats to reward
himself, mimicking the EdiPulse system. b) Adam altered
Helena’s Slogan to show a playful side.
Diversity in food materials was desired

Although all participants appreciated the use of chocolate to
create activity treats, they also wished for more food
diversity. Fiona said: “We eat a variety of food on a daily
basis. This is a particular device that prints only chocolate.
But I am sure in 10-20 years, I could see every food being
3D printed.” Four participants on the other hand wanted to
print with healthier foods like protein powder to closely tie
EdiPulse with their exercise nutrition routine.

T5: Co-experience

The final theme describes the social qualities of activity
treats, facilitated by the co-experience [29] of printing
treats with family members.
Activity treats drove healthy competition

The system also encouraged healthy competition between
four couples. Gavin and Daisy competed with each other in
terms of who would get a super happy Emoji. Helena also
mentioned: “I loved when Adam got the printed ‘Slogan’ as
‘Helena is getting all the happy 'Emoji’. I liked how it
reflects my competence”. Her partner, Adam, who was less
active than Helena took this fact sportingly and manually
wrote the following message on top of Helena’s Slogan:
“Adam is getting all the chocolate” (Refer to Figure 6.b).
Printing activity treats brought participants together

All participants enjoyed preparing activity treats together.
Rohan compared printing activity treats with cooking and
enjoyed doing it together with Diya. He said: “It was like
cooking but with more fun because we also get to talk about
what treats we will get and then compare our treats.”
Participants also encouraged each other to achieve their
fitness goals and showed keen interest in each other’s data.
Jayden said: “Normally, I would not have looked at Sarah’s
data if it was only on a mobile, but now it is printing right
in front of me. I felt intrigued to know more about how her
day went.”
Families provided social push to exercise

The public visibility of EdiPulse and sweet aroma of hot
chocolate being printed grabbed attention of nonparticipating family members. Frank said, “As I woke up,
the first thing my friend Kelly reminded me was to do
exercise and monitor myself. I guess, she just wanted to
start her day with the pleasant smell of my activity treats.”
In Karen and Josh’s case, the reaction of their son was
equally inspiring and acted as a push for them to do more
exercise. Karen voiced: “I knew that our son would
certainly look at them (the smiley) and compare why is
yours a smiley and why is dad’s a sad face. I want daddy to
get a happy face, so I think it could be quite persuasive”.
IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN

Based on the study insights, we draw designers’ attention to
following design implications [75] that could help in
building playful food based designs for supporting the
experience of being physically active.
Delayed Feedback & Anticipatory Savoring

In our study, we found that participants appreciated getting
the feedback on their daily activity level at the end of the
day. Having to wait for their activity treats moderated
participants’ consumption of chocolate throughout the day.
Rather than eating any chocolate at any time, participants
valued getting the activity treats, which were personalized
to their activity levels. Since there was no feedback on
whether the participant had achieved their activity goal for
the day until evening, the delayed feedback also added a
surprise element to what the activity treats were going to

be. This uncertainty in predicting whether they have done
enough activity to get a super happy Emoji, fuelled interest
in doing opportunistic physical activity [18].
The appreciation to delayed feedback can be explained in
terms of the Anticipatory Savoring [53], where an
individual psychologically looks forward to a positive
experience. In this case, the positive experience was to
enjoy well-deserved chocolate treats. Getting the feedback
at the end of the day not only moderated participant’s
cravings for chocolate but also pushed them to be more
active throughout the day. Moderation of chocolate eating
habit was a surprise finding to us because unlike a meal,
chocolate is usually not eaten in a fixed pattern. Rather it is
munched at any time of the day. Similar results were found
in earlier studies where anticipatory savoring reduced
overall consumption of chocolate [10, 44, 61]. Since in
EdiPulse chocolate was closely linked to one’s active life, it
subconsciously affected participants’ eating choices. We
therefore encourage designers to create opportunities for
anticipatory savoring by utilizing appealing materials and
keeping them as surprise through the use of delayed
feedback. The importance of delayed feedback is also
iterated in earlier works on slow design [34,62,67].
Visual Appeal

The study highlighted that the visual aspect of the activity
treats was very crucial in contributing a positive
experience. We found that participants wanted appealing
and perfectly printed activity treats and in this pursuit, they
were happy to perform multiple prints if the initial print was
not as good as expected. We also found that irrespective of
their activity levels, participants were motivated to print
their activity routines daily. To this end, receiving activity
treats printed in chocolate offered moments of mastery
experience supporting individual’s self-efficacy [5,86].
Our study also highlights the importance of an appealing
medium to represent data, because participants found the
sight of a beautifully printed chocolate difficult to ignore
[22,80]. As such, we found that the visual aspect of the
treats had significant impact on the overall experience to
the extent that even negative feedback served as motivation.
For example, we found that participants were not
discouraged by seeing the sad Emoji on sedentary days,
rather it served as an inspirational goal to do more exercise
to achieve a super happy Emoji. This finding contrasts with
the findings of prior study on Fish’n’Steps system [51]
where the negative framing of the on-screen feedback led to
reduced interest in data.
In line with earlier studies [45,48], participants also
preferred intuitiveness with a possibility of quickly gaining
insights into their activities in comparison to exploring
graphical data that require numerical literacy and
interpretive abilities. For example, we found that the Emoji
and Slogan had more appeal than the Graph and Flower.
We thus encourage designers to consider the visual appeal
of the activity treats for both active and sedentary days

while keeping the representations easy to interpret. Finally,
in this work, we only looked into altering the visual forms
of activity treats, but other features such as flavor aroma
[22] and texture [79,81] could also be explored to make
activity treats pleasurable.
Printing process & Savoring

We found that participants cherished the printing process as
much as the consumption afterwards, unlike our earlier
study, where the process of 3D printing plastic artifacts
received lesser appreciation [45]. All participants enjoyed
the printing sound of the printer. The sight and smell of the
chocolate being slowly overlaid on the print bed further
added to the sensorial experience. The ad-hoc printing of
the treats also glued participants to the printing site, as they
treated it as a game of guessing the right word.
Interestingly, this activity also gave participants an
opportunity to reflect on each other’s activity levels for that
day. Although the preparation in terms of getting the
chocolate ready for printing was felt to be laborious,
participants’ interests in printing sustained throughout the
study. They felt that the benefits like the excitement of
seeing their data in an edible form were bigger than the
duties they had to perform.
The interplay of different senses, together with slow reveal
of data facilitated by ad-hoc printing lends itself to
Savoring [13]. Savoring aims to prolong and intensify the
enjoyment of a consumption experience by drawing
attention to sensory aspects of the experience that might
otherwise be missed [13]. Wang et al. [88] described five
advantages of data edibilization in terms of attractiveness,
richness, memorability, affectiveness and sociability, which
our study confirmed. Learning from these insights, we
encourage designers to accommodate both printer and food
characteristics to engage users in the printing process.
The field study also identified some open challenges in the
printing process such as the preparation labor and printing
troubles, which we believe would resolve as food printing
technology advances. We already see efforts in this
direction, e.g., printers like Foodini [28] and Bocusini [14]
offer much smoother workflows. However, we argue that
instead of making food printing efficient, we can harness its
slowness to offer playful engagement that capitalizes on
savoring. Secondly, multisensorial nature of engagement
with the printing process could also potentially increase the
value of the provided feedback [38,54]. Earlier work [4]
also suggests that involving users in the creation process
can make feedback more influential.
Consumption

After making a good quality print of their activity treats,
participants enjoyed consuming them. As these treats were
printed in thin spread-out form, it also prolonged the
experience of eating chocolate without the worry or guilt of
consuming too much chocolate. We also found that
participants enjoyed getting chocolate treats on active days,
whereas on sedentary days, they preserved these treats for

later consumption. However, the data element of activity
treats added an interesting twist to the social behavior of
the participants. Participants shared the photographs of their
treats with their friends and on social networks. But since
these representations were carrying the personal data of
participants, they rarely shared their treats with anyone.
Rather, these treats became objects of self-esteem and
pride. Earlier studies [45,73,83,85] also report similar
personality traits where individuals took pride in their data.
As participants became more aware of each other’s active
life, they persuaded each other to complete their activity
goals. Interestingly, even the non-study participants were
intrigued by the idea of activity treats, and their
involvement in the process further encouraged participants
to persist with their daily goals. These findings correlate
with the earlier work on family based reflection [74] where
healthy competition in a family setting led to enjoyment
and motivation towards physical activity.
Our study identified two contrasting behavior related to the
consumption of personal data and food. Physical activity
data, which is usually meant for personal consumption
became social through the public process of printing,
whereas chocolate, which is something people share, was
kept for personal consumption. This leads to an interesting
question as to whether the designers should focus on
personalizing the design of activity treats or they should try
to focus on nurturing social experiences. In future, it would
also be interesting to see how creating activity treats from
more than one person’s data facilitate both social
experience and self-esteem.
CONCLUSION

This paper offered the first conceptual understanding of the
relationship between appealing foods like chocolate and
physical activity through the design and study of EdiPulse.
Given the exploratory nature of this work, pursuing users to
be physically active was not the primary focus of this work.
Instead, our intention was to gather a descriptive account on
how playful treats in an appealing medium of chocolate can
positively influence an individual’s behavior and attitude
towards physical activity. To this end, we do not position
our work as a health promotion tool. However, we
acknowledge two main limitations of our work: 1) a short
design-led exploratory study, and 2) the novelty of the 3D
chocolate printer. We invite further research to understand
long-term effects and use of activity treats.
We also see our work as a precursor to exciting
opportunities that food printing technology [76,84] will
afford for playful self-monitoring. This work also opens up
opportunities for interdisciplinary collaborations amongst
different fields: food sciences, design, sports and nutritional
science and HCI. We look forward to exploring and
witnessing new ways of connecting the biographies of the
material world with the immaterial world.

REFERENCES

1.

2.

3.

Ala’A. Alkerwi, Nicolas Sauvageot, Georgina E.
Crichton, Merrill F. Elias, and Saverio Stranges. 2016.
Daily chocolate consumption is inversely associated
with insulin resistance and liver enzymes in the
Observation of Cardiovascular Risk Factors in
Luxembourg study. British Journal of Nutrition 115,
no. 09 (2016): 1661-1668.
Judith E. Allgrove, Emily Farrell, Michael Gleeson,
Gary Williamson, and Karen Cooper. 2011. Regular
dark chocolate consumption's reduction of oxidative
stress and increase of free-fatty-acid mobilization in
response to prolonged cycling. International journal of
sport nutrition and exercise metabolism 21, no. 2: 113.
American College of Sports Medicine. 2013. ACSM's
guidelines for exercise testing and prescription.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

11. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using
thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research
in psychology, 3(2), pp.77-101.
12. Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin. Physiologie du Goût
[The Philosopher in the Kitchen / The Physiology of
Taste]; 1835. Translated by A. Lalauze: A Handbook of
Gastronomy. London: Nimmo & Bain; 1884.
13. Fred B. Bryant and Joseph Veroff 2007. Savoring: A
new model of positive experience. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers.
14. Bocusini http://www.bocusini.com/
15. Michel Cabanac. 2009. The dialectics of pleasure. In
Kringelbach & Berridge (eds.), Pleasures of the brain
(pp. 113-124). Oxford University Press.
16. ChocEdge. http://chocedge.com/
17. Rob Comber, Jaz Hee-Jeong Choi, Jettie Hoonhout,
and Kenton O'hara. 2014. Editorial: Designing for
human-food interaction: An introduction to the special
issue on 'food and interaction design'.Int. J. Hum.Comput. Stud. 72, 2 (2014), 181-184.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2013.09.001

4.

Swamy Ananthanarayan, Katie Siek, and Michael
Eisenberg. 2016. A Craft Approach to Health
Awareness in Children. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems
(DIS '16). ACM, 724-735. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901888

5.

Stephanie Ashford, Jemma Edmunds, and David P.
French 2010. What is the best way to change selfefficacy to promote lifestyle and recreational physical
activity? A systematic review with metaanalysis. British journal of health psychology, 15(2),
265-288.

6.

Stephen Barrass and Gregory Kramer 1999. Using
sonification. Multimedia systems 7, no. 1, 23-31.

7.

Eric P.S. Baumer. 2015. Reflective Informatics:
Conceptual Dimensions for Designing Technologies of
Reflection. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '15). ACM, 585-594. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702234

19. Sunny Consolvo, David W. McDonald, Tammy
Toscos, Mike Y. Chen, Jon Froehlich, Beverly
Harrison, Predrag Klasnja, Anthony LaMarca, Louis
LeGrand, Ryan Libby, Ian Smith, and James A.
Landay. 2008. Activity sensing in the wild: a field trial
of ubifit garden. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '08). ACM, 1797-1806.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1357054.1357335

8.

Frank Bentley, Konrad Tollmar, Peter Stephenson,
Laura Levy, Brian Jones, Scott Robertson, Ed Price,
Richard Catrambone, and Jeff Wilson. 2013. Health
Mashups: Presenting Statistical Patterns between
Wellbeing Data and Context in Natural Language to
Promote Behavior Change. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 20, 5, 30, 27 pages.

20. Sunny Consolvo, David W. McDonald, and James A.
Landay. 2009. Theory-driven design strategies for
technologies that support behavior change in everyday
life. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '09).
ACM, 405-414.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518766

9.

Shlomo Berkovsky, Jill Freyne, and Mac Coombe.
2012. Physical Activity Motivating Games: Be Active
and Get Your Own Reward. ACM Trans. Comput.Hum. Interact. 19, 4, Article 32 (2012), 41 pages.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2395131.2395139

21. Georgina E. Crichton, Merrill F. Elias, and Ala'A.
Alkerwi. 2016. Chocolate intake is associated with
better cognitive function: The Maine-Syracuse
Longitudinal Study. Appetite 100 (2016): 126-132.

10. Iain R. Black and Charles S. Areni 2016. Anticipatory
Savoring and Consumption: Just Thinking about That
First Bite of Chocolate Fills You Up Faster.
Psychology & Marketing 33, no. 7 (2016): 516-524.

18. Sunny Consolvo, Predrag Klasnja, David W.
McDonald, and James A. Landay 2014. Designing for
healthy lifestyles: Design considerations for mobile
technologies to encourage consumer health and
wellness. Foundations and Trends in Human Computer
Interaction, 6(34): 167–315.

22. Lieve Doucé, Karolien Poels, Wim Janssens, and
Charlotte De Backer. 2013. Smelling the books: The
effect of chocolate scent on purchase-related behavior
in a bookstore. Journal of Environmental Psychology
36 (2013): 65-69.

23. Chris Elsden, Mark Selby, Abigail Durrant, and David
Kirk. 2016. Fitter, happier, more productive: what to
ask of a data-driven life. interactions 23, 5 (August
2016), 45-45. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2975388.
24. Daniel A. Epstein, Monica Caraway, Chuck Johnston,
An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2016.
Beyond Abandonment to Next Steps: Understanding
and Designing for Life after Personal Informatics Tool
Use. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '16).
ACM, 1109-1113. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858045.
25. Jordan Etkin. 2016. The hidden cost of personal
quantification. Journal of Consumer Research 42: 967–
984.
26. Chloe Fan, Jodi Forlizzi, and Anind K. Dey. 2012. A
spark of activity: exploring informative art as
visualization for physical activity. In Proceedings of
the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp '12). ACM, 81-84.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2370216.2370229
27. Grace Farhat, Sandra Drummond, Lorna Fyfe, and
Emad AS Al‐Dujaili. 2014. Dark chocolate: an obesity
paradox or a culprit for weight gain? Phytotherapy
Research 28, no. 6 (2014): 791-797.
28. Foodini. https://www.naturalmachines.com/.
29. Jodi Forlizzi and Katja Battarbee. 2004. Understanding
experience in interactive systems. In Proceedings of
the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems:
processes, practices, methods, and techniques (DIS
'04). ACM, 261-268.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1013115.1013152
30. Jon Froehlich, Leah Findlater, and James Landay.
2010. The design of eco-feedback technology. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '10). ACM, 19992008.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753629.
31. William W. Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve Benford.
2003. Ambiguity as a resource for design. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '03). ACM, 233240. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/642611.642653
32. Rúben Gouveia, Evangelos Karapanos, and Marc
Hassenzahl. 2015. How do we engage with activity
trackers?: a longitudinal study of Habito. In
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp '15). ACM, 1305-1316. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804290
33. Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper. 2008. Celebratory
technology: new directions for food research in HCI. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human

Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '08). ACM, 467476. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1357054.1357130.
34. Barbara Grosse-Hering, Jon Mason, Dzmitry
Aliakseyeu, Conny Bakker, and Pieter Desmet. 2013.
Slow design for meaningful interactions. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). ACM, 34313440. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2466472
35. Marc Hassenzahl, Kai Eckold, Sarah Diefenbach,
Matthias Laschke, Eva Len, and Joonhwan Kim. 2013.
Designing moments of meaning and pleasure.
Experience design and happiness. International
Journal of Design, 7(3), 21-31.
36. Marc Hassenzahl and Matthias Laschke 2015.
Pleasurable Troublemakers. In S. Walz and S.
Deterding, eds., The Gameful World: Approaches,
Issues, Applications, 167-195.
37. Marc Hassenzahl, Matthias Laschke, and Julian Praest.
2016. On the stories activity trackers tell. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing:
Adjunct (UbiComp '16). ACM, 582-587. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2968325.
38. Sander Hermsen, Jeana Frost, Reint Jan Renes, and
Peter Kerkhof 2016. Using feedback through digital
technology to disrupt and change habitual behavior: A
critical review of current literature. Computers in
Human Behavior, 57, 61-74.
39. Victoria Hollis, Artie Konrad, and Steve Whittaker.
2015. Change of Heart: Emotion Tracking to Promote
Behavior Change. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '15). ACM, 2643-2652. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702196
40. Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg,
Jason Alexander, Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram
Subramanian, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2015.
Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization.
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15).
ACM, 3227-3236.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702180
41. Susanne Jaschko and Moritz Stefaner. 2014. Data
cuisine. http://data-cuisine.net/.
42. Vaiva Kalnikaite, Yvonne Rogers, Jon Bird, Nicolas
Villar, Khaled Bachour, Stephen Payne, Peter M.
Todd, Johannes Schöning, Antonio Krüger, and Stefan
Kreitmayer. 2011. How to nudge in Situ: designing
lambent devices to deliver salient information in
supermarkets. In Proceedings of the 13th international
conference on Ubiquitous computing (UbiComp '11).
ACM, 11-20.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030115

43. Flavius Kehr, Marc Hassenzahl, Matthias Laschke, and
Sarah Diefenbach. 2012. A transformational product to
improve self-control strength: the chocolate machine.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '12). ACM, 689694. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2207774
44. Chelsey L. Keeler, Richard D. Mattes, and Sze‐Yen
Tan. 2015. Anticipatory and reactive responses to
chocolate restriction in frequent chocolate consumers.
Obesity 23, no. 6 (2015): 1130-1135.
45. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian 'Floyd'
Mueller. 2014. Understanding physical activity through
3D printed material artifacts. In Proceedings of the
32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in
computing systems (CHI '14). ACM, 3835-3844.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557144
46. Rohit Ashok Khot, Jeewon Lee, Deepti Aggarwal,
Larissa Hjorth, and Florian 'Floyd' Mueller. 2015.
TastyBeats: Designing Palatable Representations of
Physical Activity. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '15). ACM, 2933-2942.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702197
47. Rohit Ashok Khot, Ryan Pennings, and Florian 'Floyd'
Mueller. 2015. EdiPulse: Supporting Physical Activity
with Chocolate Printed Messages. In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA
'15). ACM, 1391-1396.
48. Amanda Lazar, Christian Koehler, Joshua Tanenbaum,
and David H. Nguyen. 2015. Why we use and abandon
smart devices. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp '15). ACM, 635646. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2750858.2804288.
49. Moon-Hwan Lee, Seijin Cha, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2015.
Patina Engraver: Visualizing Activity Logs as Patina in
Fashionable Trackers. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, 1173-1182.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702213.
50. Steve Leffer, Chocolate 101: About Tempering -- What
It Is, How To Temper Chocolate and The Alternative.
http://www.chocoley.com/resources/about-temperingchocolate.
51. James J. Lin, Lena Mamykina, Silvia Lindtner,
Gregory Delajoux, and Henry B. Strub. 2006.
Fish'n'Steps: encouraging physical activity with an
interactive computer game. In Proceedings of the 8th
international conference on Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp'06), Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 261-278.
52. Edwin A. Locke and Gary P. Latham. 2002. Building a
practically useful theory of goal setting and task

motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American psychologist
57, no. 9 (2002): 705.
53. George Loewenstein, 1987. Anticipation and the
valuation of delayed consumption. The Economic
Journal 97, no. 387 (1987): 666-684.
54. Geke DS Ludden, Hendrik NJ Schifferstein, and Paul
Hekkert 2006. Sensory incongruity: comparing vision
to touch, audition and olfaction. In 5th International
Conference on Design and Emotion, Göteborg,
Sweden. 1-17.
55. Deborah Lupton. Food, the Body and the Self. London:
SAGE Publications Ltd., 1998.
56. Deborah Lupton 2016. The Quantified Self: A
Sociology of Self-Tracking Cultures. Polity press.
57. Dan Maynes-Aminzade 2005. Edible Bits: Seamless
Interfaces between People, Data and Food. CHI 2005.
58. Elisa D. Mekler and Kasper Hornbæk. 2016.
Momentary Pleasure or Lasting Meaning?:
Distinguishing Eudaimonic and Hedonic User
Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '16). ACM, 4509-4520. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858225
59. Martin Murer, Ilhan Aslan, and Manfred Tscheligi.
2013. LOLLio: exploring taste as playful modality. In
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (TEI
'13). ACM, 299-302.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2460625.2460675
60. Ine Mols, Elise van den Hoven, and Berry Eggen.
2016. Technologies for Everyday Life Reflection:
Illustrating a Design Space. In Proceedings of the TEI
'16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI '16). ACM,
53-61. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2839466
61. Carey K Morewedge, Young Eun Huh, and Joachim
Vosgerau. 2010. Thought for food: Imagined
consumption reduces actual consumption. Science 330,
no. 6010 (2010): 1530-1533.
62. Gina Neff and Dawn Nafus. The Self-Tracking. MIT
Press, 2016.
63. Scott Nicholson 2015. A recipe for meaningful
gamification. In Gamification in education and
business, pp. 1-20. Springer International Publishing.
64. Takuji Narumi, Takashi Kajinami, Tomohiro
Tanikawa, and Michitaka Hirose. 2010, Meta cookie.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Emerging Technologies
(SIGGRAPH '10). ACM, Article 18, 1 pages.
DOI=10.1145/1836821.1836839
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1836821.1836839

65. Stina Nylander, Mattias Jacobsson, and Jakob
Tholander. 2014. Runright: real-time visual and audio
feedback on running. In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14).
ACM, 583-586.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2574806
66. Marianna Obrist, Carlos Velasco, Chi Vi, Nimesha
Ranasinghe, Ali Israr, Adrian Cheok, Charles Spence,
and Ponnampalam Gopalakrishnakone. 2016. Sensing
the future of HCI: touch, taste, and smell user
interfaces. interactions 23, 5 (2016), 40-49. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2973568
67. William T. Odom, Abigail J. Sellen, Richard Banks,
David S. Kirk, Tim Regan, Mark Selby, Jodi L.
Forlizzi, and John Zimmerman. 2014. Designing for
slowness, anticipation and re-visitation: a long term
field study of the photobox. In Proceedings of the 32nd
annual ACM conference on Human factors in
computing systems (CHI '14). ACM, 1961-1970.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557178
68. OpenJSCAD, http://openjscad.org
69. Polar Heart rate monitors,
http://www.polar.com/products/accessories/H7_heart_r
ate_sensor
70. Printrun http://www.pronterface.com/
71. Qkies http://qkies.de/
72. Yvonne Rogers. 2011. Interaction design gone wild:
striving for wild theory. Interactions 18, 4, 58- 62.
73. John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and
Matthew Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking
as lived informatics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '14). ACM, 1163-1172.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039
74. Herman Saksono, Ashwini Ranade, Geeta Kamarthi,
Carmen Castaneda-Sceppa, Jessica A. Hoffman, Cathy
Wirth, and Andrea G. Parker. 2015. Spaceship Launch:
Designing a Collaborative Exergame for Families.
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing (CSCW '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1776-1787. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675159
75. Corina Sas, Steve Whittaker, Steven Dow, Jodi
Forlizzi, and John Zimmerman. 2014. Generating
implications for design through design research. In
Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems (CHI '14). ACM,
1971-1980. DOI=10.1145/2556288.2557357
76. Johannes Schoning, Yvonne Rogers, Antonio Kruger,
2012. Digitally Enhanced Food, IEEE Pervasive
Computing, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 4-6, July-September,
2012.

77. Wesley P. Schultz, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B.
Cialdini, Noah J. Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevicius.
2007. The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive
power of social norms. Psychological science 18, no. 5
(2007): 429-434.
78. Smoothfood. http://smoothfood.de/foodforms/?lang=en
79. Charles Spence 2002. Multisensory attention and
tactile information-processing. Behavioural brain
research, 135(1), 57-64.
80. Charles Spence, Katsunori Okajima, Adrian David
Cheok, Olivia Petit, and Charles Michel. 2015, Eating
with our eyes: from visual hunger to digital satiation.
Brain and cognition.
81. Charles Spence and Betina Piqueras-Fiszman. 2013.
The Perfect Meal: The Multisensory Science of Food
and Dining, Wiley-Blackwell.
82. Tadeusz Stach, T. C. Nicholas Graham, Jeffrey Yim,
and Ryan E. Rhodes. 2009. Heart rate control of
exercise video games. In Proceedings of Graphics
Interface 2009 (GI '09). Canadian Information
Processing Society, Toronto, Ont., Canada, Canada,
125-132.
83. Simon Stusak, Aurelién Tabard, Franziska Sauka,
Rohit Ashok Khot, and Andreas Butz. 2014. Activity
sculptures: exploring the impact of physical
visualizations on running activity. TVCG 20, 12
(2014), 2201–2210.
84. Jie Sun, Weibiao Zhou, Dejian Huang, Jerry YH Fuh,
and Geok Soon Hong. 2015. An Overview of 3D
Printing Technologies for Food Fabrication. Food and
Bioprocess Technology (2015), 1–11.
85. Jakob Tholander and Stina Nylander 2015, Snot,
Sweat, Pain, Mud, and Snow: Performance and
Experience in the Use of Sports Watches. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15).
ACM, 2913-2922. DOI=10.1145/2702123.2702482
http://doi.acm.org/ 10.1145/2702123.2702482
86. Stewart G Trost, Neville Owen, Adrian E Bauman,
James F Sallis, and Wendy Brown. 2002. Correlates of
adults’ participation in physical activity: review and
update. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 34,
12: 1996–2001.
http://doi.org/10.1249/01.MSS.0000038974.76900.92
87. Greg Walsh and Jennifer Golbeck. 2014. StepCity: a
preliminary investigation of a personal informaticsbased social game on behavior change. In CHI '14
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2371-2376.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2581326

88. Yun Wang, Xiaojuan Ma, Qiong Luo, and Huamin Qu.
2016. Data Edibilization: Representing Data with
Food. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '16). ACM, USA, 409-422. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892570
89. Jun Wei, Xiaojuan Ma, and Shengdong Zhao. 2014.
Food messaging: using edible medium for social
messaging. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '14).

ACM, 2873-2882.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557026
90. Oren Zuckerman and Ayelet Gal-Oz. 2014.
Deconstructing gamification: evaluating the
effectiveness of continuous measurement, virtual
rewards, and social comparison for promoting physical
activity. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 18, 7 (October
2014), 1705-1719. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-014-0783-2

