Omirou, T., Marzo, A., Subramanian, S., & Roudaut, A. (2016). Floating
Charts: Data Plotting using Free-Floating Acoustically Levitated
Representations. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI
2016): Proceedings of a meeting held 19-20 March 2016, Greenville, SC,
USA (pp. 187-190 ). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).
https://doi.org/10.1109/3DUI.2016.7460051

Peer reviewed version

Link to published version (if available):
10.1109/3DUI.2016.7460051
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document

This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via IEEE at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7460051/?arnumber=7460051. Please refer to any applicable
terms of use of the publisher.

University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms

Omirou, T., Marzo, A., Subramanian, S., & Roudaut, A. (2016). Floating
Charts: Data Plotting using Free-Floating Acoustically Levitated
Representations. 1-4.

Peer reviewed version

Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document

University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms.html
Take down policy
Explore Bristol Research is a digital archive and the intention is that deposited content should not be
removed. However, if you believe that this version of the work breaches copyright law please contact
open-access@bristol.ac.uk and include the following information in your message:
• Your contact details
• Bibliographic details for the item, including a URL
• An outline of the nature of the complaint
On receipt of your message the Open Access Team will immediately investigate your claim, make an
initial judgement of the validity of the claim and, where appropriate, withdraw the item in question
from public view.

Floating Charts: Data Plotting using Free-Floating
Acoustically Levitated Representations
Themis Omirou*

Asier Marzo Perez

Sriram Subramanian

University of Bristol

University of Bristol

University of Sussex

ABSTRACT
Charts are graphical representations of numbers that help us to
extract trends, relations and in general to have a better
understanding of data. For this reason, multiple systems have been
developed to display charts in a digital or physical manner. Here,
we introduce Floating Charts, a modular display that utilizes
acoustic levitation for positioning free-floating objects. Multiple
objects are individually levitated to compose a dynamic floating
chart with the ability to move in real time to reflect changes in data.
Floating objects can have different sizes and colours to represent
extra information. Additionally, they can be levitated across other
physical structures to improve depth perception. We present the
system design, a technical evaluation and a catalogue of chart
variations.
Keywords: Acoustic Levitation, Charts, Physical visualizations
Index Terms: User interface Evaluation/ methodology
1

INTRODUCTION

Charts are a way of visualizing data that facilitates extracting
trends, relations and in general allow us to have a better visual
insight of raw numbers. By representing numerical values as visual
information (i.e. position, size or colour), we take advantage of our
inherent skill set to analyse the spatial world [3]. Consequently,
there has been a significant interest in evolving the way that visual
information is presented to the users. This information can be
displayed in various ways, either with physical objects or digitally
on a computer screen.
Several types of physical visualizations (physicalizations)
related to charts have been created. For instance, 3D-printed static
objects can be used to represent charts [4] but they lack the ability
to change dynamically without the need of rebuilding the objects or
user intervention. Another possibility is to utilize actuators to move
columns or other physical entities [2][8] but the scalability, power
consumption and occlusions are still to be improved; something as
simple as a scatterplot is yet to be presented [3].
Here, we use for the first time acoustic levitation to create
displays capable of rendering free-floating dynamic physical
representations of data. The displays are called Floating Charts and
are constructed by joining together building blocks. Each building
block has a different configuration of ultrasonic speakers that can
levitate and control one or a group of particles inside it. This
enables the creation of displays of various sizes and characteristics,
in which the levitated particles represent different values of data.
Acoustic levitation suspends objects in mid-air and can translate
them around 3D paths. This is a new opportunity for creating
dynamic physical visualizations without the restrains of gravity or
mechanical actuation.

* Themis.Omirou@bristol.ac.uk

Anne Roudaut
University of Bristol

We believe that there are several advantages in building a display
capable of representing acoustically levitated charts. Firstly, the
levitated objects can be moved accurately and at a considerable
speed, enabling information that gets updated in real time.
Secondly, the floating particles do not require any physical support
and thus do not occlude each other, allowing the user to have better
viewing angles. Thirdly, the values are represented by physical
objects that do not need to emit light to be visualized with the
benefit of reducing eye fatigue; also, this enables a more natural
perception of depth. Finally, acoustically transparent
embellishments can be intertwined with the system, which can have
a significant effect on our perception of the presented data.
In this paper, we create a modular system that represents charts
using mid-air floating objects actuated individually with acoustic
levitation. Additionally, we present a list of modifications that can
be applied to the levitated objects to enhance the displayed
information (e.g. using coloured beads of different sizes or fabrics
and threads connecting them).
2

PRINCIPLES OF ACOUSTIC LEVITATION

Sound waves can exert forces and completely suspended them in
air [1]. The most basic arrangement to produce this effect is a
transducer (sound emitter) and a reflector on top [9], this creates a
standing wave and particles levitate in its nodes (i.e. areas of low
amplitude). By changing the phase of the transducers, movement
of the particle can be achieved [5][6][7].
Ochiai et al. [6] presented a system composed of 4 opposing
arrays of ultrasonic speakers that could suspend and move objects
in 3D space. Later, Omirou et al. [7] created a modular system
composed of 2 opposing arrays of speakers; the system was used
for the physical representations of 3D paths. Recently, acoustic
levitation has been achieved with all sort of geometries and even
single-sided arrangements using a holographic method [5].
Here, we present a modular display that uses the holographic
method to create dynamic physical representations of data
composed of dozens of free-floating particles that are levitated and
moved independently.
In this paper, we use levitators composed of two arrays of
transducers. The arrays are in a flower pattern with 7 transducers
arranged in a hexagon. The distance between the transducers was
approximately equal to the wavelength and therefore the flower
array makes a better use of the constructive interferences at the
target point. Also, the hexagonal pattern permits to pack more
transducers in less space. The geometries we tested are the two
opposed arrays, a reflector and an array, L-shaped, and V-shapes.
To apply the holographic method in our levitators, first all the
transducers get focused in the target point by adjusting their phases;
then, a π-phase difference is added to one of the arrays. For the
reflector, it is enough to generate a focal point at the target point
since the reflected wave will create the standing wave pattern. More
details about this method can be found in [5].

3

FLOATING CHARTS DISPLAYS

In this section we present the composition of Floating Charts
displays. An instance of the display is made by assembling different
building blocks together. The levitating objects inside the building
blocks are denominated as floating values, a collection of them
form a Floating chart.
3.1
Building Blocks
In this section we explore the possibilities of the most promising
arrangements. We tested these geometries of building blocks to
minimize the amount of transducers required, their size and the
interferences created when joined together.
3.1.1 Two-opposed
In this block, two flower arrays face each other and are separated
by a distance of 6cm. Smaller distances are possible, with the
maximum separation for stable levitation being 10 cm. Also, larger
separations imply that the building blocks have to be assembled
together leaving bigger gaps between them for avoiding
interferences. Although the levitating particle is occluded from the
top, the system presents a very good visualization angle from any
direction, and can be visualized laterally from any angle.
A display composed of 4 columns and 3 rows of two-opposed
blocks is presented in Figure 1. Each building block is separated by
2cm, this distance was selected to allow individual movement along
the vertical axis with minimal interference between neighbouring
building blocks.
3.1.2 Reflector
The second type of building block utilizes only a single array with
an opposing reflector made of transparent acrylic. The acoustic
wave is reflected off the acrylic and a standing wave is formed
between the acrylic and the array. This block requires half the
amount of transducers but its manoeuvrability and range is reduced.
An interesting feature of this block is that it can be viewed from the
top through the transparent acrylic. However, this block is more
suitable for static representations since the levitated particles can
only be moved laterally. In Figure 2.a we show a display composed
of 4 of these blocks in a row that share the same transparent
reflector. The particles were preplaced at the appropriate heights.
3.1.3 L-shape
L-shape blocks are created by placing two flower arrays at a 90º
angle as shown in Figure 2.c. The particles have good
manoeuvrability in this block and can be observed from any angle
but not from the back. The main disadvantage of these block is that
it can only accommodate one particle given the tilted pattern of the
standing wave.
3.1.4 V-shape
V-shape blocks are composed of two flower arrays placed at a
35o angle as shown in Figure 2.b. There are no obstructions from
any viewing angle since the objects levitate above the block.
However, it is limited in terms of range, strength and speed.
3.2
Floating Values
Inside each of the building blocks an object can be levitated and
moved to the target position to represent different numbers. We
denominate these particles as floating values. Different
characteristics of the particles can be modified to reflect the value
that they represent. The default floating values used in our system
are white expanded polystrerine beads of approximately 2 mm.

Figure 1: A Floating Chart display composed of 4x3 two-opposed
blocks. Floating values of various colors are levitated at
different heights to represent numerical values of tabular data.
The dimensions of the display are 14x17x8cm and the particles
are 2mm in diameter.

a

b

c
d

Figure 2: a) A Floating Chart made of 4x1 reflector blocks. The
dimensions of the display are 14x17x8cm and the particles are
4mm in diameter. b) A Floating Chart composed of 4x2 V-shape
blocks, the particles are 2mm in diameter. c) A Floating Chart
composed of 4 L-shape blocks, the particles are 2mm in
diameter; (d) the digital counterpart of the floating chart

3.2.1 Height and Movement
The main property of the floating value is its height which is
directly proportional to the value it represents. The height can be
changed dynamically to reflect real-time modifications of the
value.
Additionally, the objects can be moved along other axis and
therefore different repetitive movements (e.g. vertical, horizontal
or circular) can be used for each floating value. These movements
can change in speed or length to represent complex values such as
imaginary numbers or the standard deviation. Moreover these
movements can be used to create time-based visualizations.
3.2.2 Size and shape
Floating charts support levitation of beads of different size,
ranging from a diameter of 0.6mm to 5mm (Figure 3.a). The size
of the bead can be used not only to enhance visual perception but
also to convey extra information of the number. For instance, the
size can represent the importance or reliability of the value.
Additionally, the shape of the bead can change from spherical, to
disks or other planar shapes.

a

b

c

d

e

dh

g

f

Figure 3: a) Beads ranging from 0.6mm to 5mm in diameter, flat
bead on the bottom. b) Different colors applied to the beads. c)
Fluorescent paint. d) the nodes can allocate up to 5 beads of
2mm. e,f,g) a thread joining the beads. h) Acoustically
transparent fabrics are intertwined with the Floating Chart.

3.2.3 Colour
The particles can be painted or coated with different colors to
show similarities in the dataset or attract attention towards specific
areas. Varied substances can be used for coloring the bead ranging
from traditional colors (Figure 3.b) to fluorescent pigments (Figure
3.c) that would allow to visualize the charts in dark environments.
3.2.4 Number of particles
Particles can be stacked in the same column to create columns
instead of single dots (Figure 3.b). Columns are useful to create bar
charts whereas individual points can be used for scatterplots. Also,
each node can allocate up to five 2mm polystyrene beads at the
same time (Figure 3.d). The amount of particles per node reflects
an extra discrete number that ranges from 1 to 5 and it can be used
to indicate the stars of a hotel when the height is used to convey the
price.
3.2.5 Lines
Threads can be attached to a single levitated object or passed
through multiple of them. A horizontal thread can join beads to
enhance the perception of the different values, (Figure 3.f), while a
vertical thread can be used to represent columns of different heights
either in a straight (Figure 3.e) or bent line (Figure 3.g). These
threads do not directly affect the sound field, but they make the
levitated objects heavier and more unstable when they move.
3.2.6 Physical Integrations
Acoustically transparent materials with micro-holes, such as cloth
or metallic meshes can be placed inside the levitators without
reducing the strength of the levitation. These physical structures
can be intertwined with the floating charts (Figure 3.h) to embellish
the charts to motivate user approach.
3.3

Implementation

3.3.1 Hardware
The ultrasound transducers (MA40S4S, Murata Electronics,
Japan) used in Floating Charts have 1cm of diameter with a central
frequency of 40kHz, a beam spread angle of ±40° (measured at 6dB points) and sound pressure levels of 120±3 dB (measured on
the axis at z = 30cm).
These transducers are driven with a custom-made electronic
circuit. The circuit boards use XMOS L1-128 processors (XMOS,

Bristol, UK) to generate a control signal of 3.3V and 40KHz for
each channel. A MOSFET circuit per channel amplifies the square
wave signal to 15V. The driver boards can generate the signals for
the transducers with a phase resolution of π/10. Our electronics
allowed us to drive up to 192 transducers with a power consumption
of 26 Watts (15V x 1.7A).
A computer running our custom software calculates the phase
delays for the target levitation points and sends the phases to the
driver boards through a UART serial port. The phases could be
updated at up to 67 frames per second. The levitated particles are
expanded polystyrene spheres ranging from 0.6 to 5 mm of
diameter (Custompac Ltd., Castleford, UK).
3.3.2 Software
The software that controls the phase of each transducer was
implemented in Java, using the holographic method [5] which does
not require any optimization to run in real-time. The software is
able to read datasets from an Excel spreadsheet and map the
numbers to the target heights of each floating value, taking into
account the limitations of each building block in terms of levitation
volume.
4

TECHNICAL EVALUATION

In this section we analyse the technical capabilities of each of the
building blocks. These values can guide the design of the display
depending on the required update speed, size of the floating values
or capacity for holding threads.
The working volume represents the area in which a particle can
be controllably moved. The limits in this area are due to the
attenuation of sound with distance and the directive nature of the
transducers. The working volume for different building blocks is
presented in Figure 4. For the Two Opposed design, this area
expands laterally, slightly further than the transducers end, and
transversally up to half a centimetre from the transducers. In the Lshape design, the area gets slightly reduced frontally since the
pushing force from the vertical flower needs to be counteracted by
the horizontal flower. The Reflector block design features working
slices instead of volumes meaning that the particles have to be
preplaced at the desired height and can be moved laterally within
that height; the lateral span increases as the wave gets closer to the
reflector and so do the slices. In the V-shape design, the working
volume is reduced in height and can only go 1cm above the
transducers because none of the flowers emit directly contrary to
gravity. To obtain the working volume, a particle was placed in the
centre of the levitator and moved along one axis until it fell.
The repositioning error of the particles was approximately 0.3
mm. and was measured by taking a front picture of a particle,
moving 1cm away, returning it to the same position and taking
another picture. A ruler was used to transform between pixels and
cm. The absolute error is relative to the wavelength and phase
resolution, that is 0.42 mm in our systems (wavelength = 8.57mm,
phase resolution = 20).
The linear speed for positioning the particles was up to 17cm/s
laterally and 2cm/s vertically with the two-opposed block. L-shapes
offered slightly slower movements and both reflectors and Vshapes were around three times slower. This occurs because the
trapping forces were not enough to supress the oscillatory
behaviour that the particles exhibit when they are translated in midair. To measure the linear speeds, the particles were moved along
one axis in oscillatory movements of 2cm amplitude, and the speed
was increased until the particle was ejected.
Forces of the order of μN were generated on the levitated
particles since they were made of expanded polystyrene (29Kg per
m3) and had diameters ranging from 0.6mm to 5mm.

The two-opposed block design generated the strongest forces
transversally, since the arrays were placed perpendicular to the
gravity direction, and a standing wave was generated with arrays
that are directly facing each other. Two-opposed design was
capable of levitating the biggest particles even when they had
threads attached. For the same reason, Reflector blocks design had
good strength since the reflected wave was perpendicular to the
incident one. L-shape blocks design had less strength because only
one array was perpendicular to gravity and in the V-shape blocks
design, the strength was the weakest since the force component to
counteract gravity was obtained as an addition of the two flowers.
A summary of the values is shown in Figure 4. When several
blocks are combined to create displays of multiple floating
particles, the presented values decrease since even small
interferences from one block slightly affects the others.
5

DISCUSSION

Floating Charts offer some advantages compared with other
dynamic physical displays. They can be handheld without affecting
the levitation, allowing the users to explore them. The power
consumption per actuated unit is low. Also, the used beads are
inexpensive and available in big quantities, thus they can be easily
replaced, shaped or painted to provide richer information.
5.1.1 Use Cases
A simple plug-in for Excel can be used to synchronize the digital
charts with the Floating charts. That is, any change in the data
values is reflected in physical space allowing users to even use both
the physical and digital representations to make decisions and
identify trends. Another possibility would be a public display, to
which users can upload pictures of charts with their phones; the
public display analyses the chart for extracting the numerical values
and represents them as a Floating Chart.
5.1.2 Limitations
Floating Charts enable scatterplots, bar charts and some
additions like lines between data points. However, other types of
charts like pie charts are still not realizable. Similarly, the points in
the scatterplots cannot be in any random positions since there
should be a minimum distance between them.
The amount of beads used was limited and consequently the
complexity of the data that could be represented, yet a 4x3
scatterplot was a good first step. As Floating Charts are modular,
bigger systems can be created to promote collaborative graph
inspection without the need of mounting devices on the users. By
using more directional transducers or by reducing the frequency,
distance between the levitated objects can be reduced thus
increasing the resolution of the system.
Future research should focus on the interaction with Floating
Charts. A limitation of the presented systems is the fact that the
users were unable to directly touch the levitated objects without
reducing the robustness of the system in terms of maintaining
levitation. A certain amount of user interaction is still possible but
if a non-acoustically transparent object is placed between the
levitated object and the transducers, then the wave will be reflected
and the object will fall. The same will happen if air is blown onto
the array either by the user or from another source.
While the frequency used in our system is not audible to humans,
several animals such as dogs will be able to hear the ultrasonic
noise.

a

Speed
Strength

b

Speed
Strength

c

Speed
Strength

d

1cm

Speed
Strength

Figure 4: Working volume (pink area), speed and strength for: (a)
two-opposed, (b) reflector, (c) L-shaped and (d) V-shape blocks.
6

CONCLUSION

An acoustic levitation display for representing dynamical freefloating charts has been presented. The displays are modular and
are created by assembling different building blocks. Building
blocks are structures with different transducer configurations that
can levitate particles inside them. Each levitating particle
represents a data value and thus a collection of them form a chart.
Several modifications can be applied to the levitating particles to
enhance the presented information.
This paper is the first showing a display capable of controlling
independently a significant amount of levitated particles.
7

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by the Center for Doctoral
Training in Communications, EPSRC Grant EP/I028153/1 and the
FET grant 309191 for the GHOST project.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

H. Brandt, Levitation in Physics, Science, New Series, Vol. 243, No.
4889, pp. 349-355, Jan 20, 1989.
S. Follmer, D. Leithinger and H. Ishii. inFORM: dynamic physical
affordances and constraints through shape and object actuation. In
Proceedings of the User Interface Software and Technology ’13 (),
pages 417–426, 2013.
Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, P. Isenberg, J. Alexander, A. Karnik, J.
Kildal, S. Subramanian and K. Hornbæk. Opportunities and
Challenges for Data Physicalization. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems ‘15 (New York, NY), pages 3227-3236, ACM, 2015.
Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, and J.D. Fekete. Evaluating the efficiency
of physical visualizations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems ’13 (New York, NY), pages
2593-2602, ACM, 2013.
A. Marzo, S.A. Seah, B.W. Drinkwater, D.R. Sahoo, B. Long and S.
Subramanian. Holographic acoustic elements for manipulation of
levitated objects. Nat. Commun. 6:8661, 2015.
Y. Ochiai, T. Hoshi and J. Rekimoto. Pixie dust: graphics generated
by levitated and animated objects in computational acoustic-potential
field. ACM Transactions on Graphics’14, 2014.
T. Omirou, A. Marzo, S. A. Seah, and S. Subramanian. LeviPath:
Modular Acoustic Levitation for 3D Path Visualisations.
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems’15 (New York, NY), pages 309-312,
ACM , 2015.
F. Taher, J. Hardy, A. Karnik, C. Weichel, Y. Jansen, K. Hornbæk and
J. Alexander. Exploring Interactions with Physically Dynamic Bar
Charts. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems’15 (New York, NY), pages
3237-3246 ACM, 2015.
R.R. Whymark. Acoustic field positioning for containerless
processing. Ultrasonics 13, 251-261. 1975.

