Go and Grow: Mapping Personal Data to a Living Plant
Fadi Botros

Charles Perin

University of Calgary

University of Calgary

Bon Adriel Aseniero
University of Calgary

botrosfadi@gmail.com

charles.perin@ucalgary.ca
Sheelagh Carpendale

baasenie@ucalgary.ca

University of Calgary

sheelagh@ucalgary.ca
ABSTRACT
Motivation is a key factor for introducing and maintaining healthy
changes in behaviour. However, typical visualization methods (e.g.,
bar-, pie-, and line charts) hardly motivate individuals. We investigate how a plant—a living visualization—whose health relies on
the plant owner’s level of activity, can engage people in tracking
and self-reflecting on their fitness data. To address this question, we
designed, implemented, and studied Go & Grow, a living plant that
receives water proportionally to its owner’s activity. Our six-week
qualitative study with ten participants suggests that living visualizations have qualities that their digital counterparts do not have.
This includes people feeling: emotionally connected to their plant;
sentiments such as pride and guilt; and responsibility towards their
plant. Based on this study, we introduce the Goal Motivation Model,
a model considering the diversity of individuals, thus supporting
and encouraging a diversity of strategies for accomplishing goals.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Information visualization;

Keywords
Fitness, Living Visualization, Personal Visualization, Plant.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Citizens of industrialized nations are subject to sedentary behaviour (prolonged sitting at home, work, or in cars) which can
lead to health complications such as obesity [13]. Adopting an
active lifestyle is difficult [24], but the simple act of self-monitoring
can lead to healthy behaviour change [33]. More and more people
are now self-monitoring with the emergence of tracking devices
which measure health data (e.g., steps, calories, and heart rate) [33].
However, the typical way of visualizing such data is through standard bar and line charts, which hardly motivate people [1]. Finding
motivation is key to ushering in behaviour change [20]. Thus, visualizing activity data in engaging ways has been studied using e.g.,
virtual metaphors [6, 22], physical metaphors [17, 19, 34] and video
games [2, 26]. We explore living visualizations to extend this trend.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

AVI ’16, June 07 - 10, 2016, Bari, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4131-8/16/06. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2909132.2909267

Figure 1: The Go & Grow system linking individuals’ activity
data to the amount of water that their personal plant receives.
While Personal Informatics (PI) tools typically rely on one’s
self-motivation, we relate the health of a plant to one’s activity
level. Taking care of a plant can be a strong motivation to maintain
healthy activity levels. Constant watering is crucial for a plant’s
longevity, but a single day of under-watering will not result in its
death. Likewise, people need regular exercise to remain healthy.
Based on design criteria gathered from existing literature, we
implemented Go & Grow, a computer-equipped cyclamen flowering plant that waters itself different amounts of water everyday
according to one’s progress towards a daily step goal (see Figure 1).
By stimulating the plant with varying amounts of water, the plant
becomes a living visualization of the individual’s step data.
Results from a six-week long qualitative study indicate that participants gained an increased awareness of their activity level and
adapted their daily behaviour. They developed feelings that standard visualizations may not trigger: emotional connection to the
plant, pride, guilt, and responsibility. We further introduce the Goal
Motivation Model, composed of four levels of goal abstraction surrounding individuals who track their fitness data. We discuss how
this model considers the diversity of individuals, and thus supports
and encourages an array of strategies for accomplishing goals.

2.

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

The emergence of personal trackers has prompted the research
area of PI. PI focuses on helping people make use of personal data
(including fitness data) for self-reflection, gaining self-knowledge,
and making actionable decisions for healthy lifestyle changes [20].
However, previous work in PI has shown that designing tools that
help people make lifestyle changes is difficult [20], and that people quickly stop using activity trackers. In a recent study, 65%
and 75% of participants stopped after two and four weeks respectively [32]; this happens regardless of fitness change [33]. This may
be explained by difficulties from finding motivation and interpreting
visualizations hindering people from continued use of PI tools [20].
We review research from Information Visualization (Infovis) and
HCI that relates to engagement as a strategy for motivation, and
describe work that inspired us to use a living plant as a visualization.

2.1

Engagement as a Source of Motivation

Engagement is a broad term which, in our context, we define as a
state of emotional involvement that leads one to commit or invest in
a certain activity. Ideally, engagement leads one to commit to an
activity in order to achieve or maintain good fitness levels.
Engaging through Personable Visualizations. One way of engaging people with their data is to provide them with insightful
and personable visualizations. Infovis is well suited for this, as its
purpose is to help people to gain insights about data [28]. However,
applications for individuals who track their own fitness data have
different goals and criteria from traditional Infovis applications—
which focus on supporting experts working with large amounts of
data. Efficiency is not necessarily the measure of success for personal or casual visualizations [15, 30] intended for use in everyday
life. Instead, other factors such as motivation, aesthetics, playfulness and pleasure are essential [34], as these can engage people in
exploring their data, in having moments of self-reflection [21, 35],
and in gaining insights in non-professional contexts [31].
Companies such as Fitbit and Garmin provide online dashboards
for visualizing fitness data using standard visualizations such as
bar-, pie-, and line-charts. While these visualizations may be simple
enough to be understood by most people, they do not seem to be
motivating, as people quickly stop using them [32]. In contrast, nontraditional or abstract visual representations (i.e. without precise
numbers) improve people’s awareness of their data [5]. This is
confirmed by evaluations of technologies such as: Ubifit Garden
which uses a virtual garden to motivate people to be more active [6];
and Fish’n’Steps which uses a virtual fish and tank to convey step
counts [22]. Abstract visualizations can also provide a sense of
privacy while still conveying high-level information [1].
These observations suggest that personable visualizations, which
are both personal “interactive visual data representations for use in
a personal context” [15] and affective because they are pleasant and
likeable, are a promising avenue for motivating people in collecting
and reflecting on their everyday life data.
Applying Cognitive Behavioural Strategies and Social Context.
Goal-setting [23], self-assessment, and monitoring of progress [10]
are well-known cognitive strategies to help people in behaviour
change. In an HCI context, such strategies can increase people’s
awareness of their data and motivate them to exercise more [11].
Berkovsky et al. [2] used virtual game rewards in exchange for
physical activity, and Nenonen et al. [26] used real-time heart rate
data to control an interactive biathlon computer game. Both showed
that goals and achievements can encourage people to be more active.
Industrial technologies (e.g., Fitbit, Garmin) focus on using cognitive behavioural strategies with social media and data sharing to
motivate people to increase their activity levels. Consolvo et al. [3]
found that groups of friends sharing their step counts over three
weeks in order to achieve a group goal increased their awareness
and gained more motivation to exercise. This may be due to the positive impression people want to maintain in their community [33].
Inciting Emotions. HCI and Infovis researchers have found that
emotions can engage people with data. Affective expression of
representations is a factor of engagement [25] and emotions can
evoke affective experiences [7]. This is echoed by studies related to
activity data. For example, Tong et al. [36] developed a game that
connects the health of a virtual pet with the owner’s physical activity.
Participants in their study developed a connection with their virtual
pet and felt the need to be more active. Similarly, many participants
in the study of Fish’n’Steps exhibited emotional attachment to the
virtual organisms visualizing their step counts [22].
Norman argues that one’s affection for beautiful things is crucial
to engagement, interest, and pleasure [27]. Plants are enjoyed for

their aesthetics, trigger short- and long-term positive emotions regardless of a person’s sex and age [12], and can improve health [18].

2.2

Towards Living Visualizations

Since living plants affect people emotionally and can change
people’s behaviour [12, 18], researchers have used virtual plant
metaphors to represent data. For example, Wang et al. [38] used
a flower metaphor for visualizing Facebook data, and found that
virtual representations of living entities could trigger insights. While
some studies showed that virtual metaphors can motivate people
to change their behaviour [4, 22], others argue that their impact on
a person’s motivation and behaviour remains unclear [9]. Overall,
the HCI and Infovis communities have focused on virtual representations [3, 4, 9]; however, there is a growing interest in using
physical metaphors to represent data (e.g., [16, 37]). Using physical
metaphors to represent personal data have great potential to motivate
people to gain awareness and change their behaviour [17, 19, 34].
From these two trends, it appears that both virtual and physical plant metaphors can improve awareness and lead to behaviour
change. Infotropism [14] presents both a living and a robotic plant
responding to the use of either a recycling or a trash container: the
plants receive light from one side according to which container
waste is put in. The plants then become visualizations of the proportion of trash and recyclables that are collected. Results from a
study suggest a clear difference between the two types of plants:
the robotic plant lost the interest of people after two days, while the
living plant sustained their interest—with participants still caring
for it after the two weeks of the study. They also found that with
the living plant, some people changed their behaviour because they
started caring for the plant and felt obligated to keep it alive, instead
of a desire to recycle more.
We build on Infotropism to explore how people’s attachment to
living visualizations can be an engaging motivator for behaviour
change. In contrast to Infotropism, which explored how the tilt of a
plant can reflect group behaviour, where a group is responsible for
the plant, we explore how the health of a plant can reflect individual
behaviour, where an individual is responsible for the plant.

3.

DESIGN CRITERIA

Looking over the literature, the increasing availability of fitness
tracking devices has led to considerable research that assess how
technology can help people in increasing their awareness of, and
in improving, their activity level. We combine the strategies that
have been proven successful for engaging people with their personal
data: personable visualization, social context, cognitive behavioural
strategies, and inciting emotions. Since people are usually emotionally attached to plants, we use this medium as a way of triggering
emotions and engaging individuals with their activity data. From the
literature, we identified design criteria that can have a positive effect
on individuals’ engagement, awareness, and behaviour change:
DC1 Abstract representations are more efficient than typical barchartlike visualizations for self-reflecting on personal data [5,6,22].
DC2 Aesthetic, playful, and pleasurable representations engage
people with everyday data and trigger emotions [21, 31, 34].
DC3 Goals that affect the representation leverage successful cognitive behavioural strategies [2, 11, 23].
DC4 Representations that can be shared leverage the benefits of
the social context on engagement [3, 33].
DC5 Representations that trigger emotional commitment favor both
short-term and long-term engagement [22, 25, 27, 36].
DC6 Non-virtual living representations leverage both physical metaphors and living plant metaphors, as well as the sustainable
interest for living things [14, 17–19, 34].

Fitbit
App

Raspberry Pi

Water amount

Fitbit API

FITBIT.COM

Number of Steps

GO & GROW
SERVER

Sync

Water Pump
Sync

Water Tank
Number of Steps Amount of Earned Plant’s Name
Towards Daily Goal Water Available

Fitbit Tracker

“Water Now” Basic Statistics
Button

Online Dashboard

Cyclamen Flower

Figure 2: Overview of Go & Grow. The plant owner wears a Fitibit tracker. Once they sync their tracker with Fitbit.com, the Go &
Grow server will access their activity data, and compute the amount of water earned corresponding to the number of steps walked.
Every midnight, the server sends the earned water amount to the Raspberry Pi, which waters the Cyclamen plant accordingly. The
owner can log on to an online dashboard to monitor their step and earned water levels, and to manually water the plant.

4.

GO & GROW SYSTEM

The six design criteria informed our design of Go & Grow (see
Figure 2), a system composed of a flowering plant, an irrigation
system, and a step-count tracker. The amount of water given to a
plant reflects the step count of the plant owner. Using a living plant
to represent one’s activity already satisfies four design criteria:
• DC1: The data is represented loosely (aspect, characteristics,
health of the plant), not with precise numerical values.
• DC2: A plant is an aesthetically pleasing thing.
• DC5: People gain affection for plants and emotionally engage
with them; they are less likely to let plants die than bar charts.
• DC6: A plant is a non-virtual living representation.
System Overview. Assume Anna is a person using a Fitbit tracker.
Anna syncs her tracker with her online Fitbit account using the
Fitbit application whenever she wants. Every midnight, the Go &
Grow server accesses Anna’s daily step count through the Fitbit API,
and converts this step count into the amount of water to give to the
plant. The server then sends this water amount to the wifi-connected
irrigation system, which automatically waters the plant accordingly.
Anna can see her daily progress, step count, and watering history in
the online dashboard. Anna can also use the dashboard to water her
plant in real time, based on her current number of steps.
Go & Grow Server. Once Anna syncs her Fitbit tracker, the Go
& Grow server accesses her step data via the Fitbit API and converts
her current step count to a percentage of completion towards her
daily step goal. As her percentage of completion increases, Anna
earns water. The earned water is represented as a percentage of the
optimal daily dosage of water that the plant needs.
Everyday at midnight, the server sends the watering amount to
the irrigation system and resets the step counter. However, the plant
can only be watered in 25% increments (25%, 50%, 75% and 100%)
in order to motivate people to achieve goals (DC3). For example,
if Anna walked 8,500 steps and her goal is 10,000, she will earn
85% of water, but her plant will only get 75% of it’s optimal daily
dosage. The difference, 10%, will be banked (available for later
use). If Anna achieves higher than 100% of her goal then the plant
will get 100% of its water and the extra water will be banked.
Online Dashboard. Anna’s online dashboard contains a green
progress bar showing her progress towards her daily step goal and a
blue bar showing how much water she has in stock. In the dashboard
shown in Figure 2, the Anna has achieved 70% of her daily goal, but
she can only use 50% of the water. Once Anna has earned at least
25% of water, she can click on the “Water Now” button to water
her plant immediately, otherwise it will happen automatically at

midnight. We implemented this functionality because: i) it gives the
plant owners the opportunity to water their plant before midnight,
as the pump makes some noise; and ii) plant owners can water their
plant in real-time and observe that the system works as expected.
Irrigation System. The irrigation system consists of a Raspberry
Pi (Version 2 Model B) and an aquarium water pump (3.5 gph
Tom Aquarium Aqua Lifter Pump). The Wi-Fi enabled Raspberry
Pi receives the amount of water from the server, and converts this
amount to the time in seconds that the water pump must be turned on.
The electronic components are fastened in a plastic box (20 × 10 × 5
cm). All the parts were bought from online stores and cost less than
US $90, which makes the system easy to build and reproduce.
Cyclamen Plant. Although this may not look to be the most
complicated part of the system, there are many variables to consider
for choosing a plant. The main considerations are:
P1 Its aesthetics: the plant should be aesthetically pleasing.
P2 Its sensitiveness to water: the amount of water the plant receives
should quickly impact its health and appearance.
P3 Its robustness to dryness: although the plant should be sensitive
to water, it should be “forgiving” and be robust enough to not
die immediately if not watered for a single day.
P4 Its environment requirements: the plant should be able to grow
indoors, sometimes with little natural sunlight.
We considered many plants before choosing the Cyclamen. We
considered tomato plants, which are sensitive to water and provide
fruits, but are not particularly aesthetically pleasing, have a strong
scent, and give fruits only when outdoor; mint, which grows fast, but
triggers allergies; impatiens, which are aesthetically pleasing and
sensitive to water, but inexplicably died during our tests. We finally
chose Cyclamens, which satisfy P1 to P4; we also did not encounter
any issue with them. Cyclamens are valued for their flowers with
upswept petals and vibrant colors (P1). Properly watered, they grow
flowers at a rapid rate of 1–2 flowers per week, but their flowers
will dry up quickly if they lack water (P2). A quick reapplication
of water will cause the plants to revitalize (P3). Persistent dry soil,
however, will impede healthy growth and will cause the plants to
die. Cyclamens thrive in cooler temperatures and do not require
direct sunlight, making them ideal for indoor settings (P4).
To determine the exact daily dosage of water Cyclamens need to
grow healthily without being under or over watered, we consistently
gave three cyclamen plants different amounts of water everyday
for four weeks. We recorded observations such as flower color,
leaf color, soil moisture, and number of flowers of each plant, and
deduced the optimal daily water dosage to be 35 mL.

G5

G2

G4

G3

G1

I3

2.6

7.4

I5

I4

I1

I2

Gaverage Iaverage

ALREADY USED A TRACKING DEVICE
INTERESTED IN FLOWERS/PLANTS

BEFORE PHASE 2

SATISFIED WITH CURRENT ACTIVITY LEVEL
STRUGGLE TO BE MORE ACTIVE
ANTICIPATE BEHAVIOR CHANGE
ANTICIPATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE PLANT

IMPROVEMENT GOALS

Figure 3: Go & Grow setup for the group participants.

We ran a six-week study with ten participants using Go & Grow.
We designed this study to explore living visualization for representing personal fitness data; and to examine people’s reaction,
motivation, and engagement with a personal living visualization.

ACTIVITY
CHANGE

5.1

INCREASED
AWARENESS

GO & GROW QUALITATIVE STUDY

IF PRECISE

5.2

Participants

We recruited ten volunteers by email and word of mouth with no
monetary compensation; this was to recruit people who were solely
interested in tracking their steps and linking their data to a plant.
We recruited five individuals I1–5 (three male) aged 21–63 (mean
31). There were two students, one engineer, one teacher, and one
manager. We recruited five group participants G1–5 (two male) aged
20–30 (mean 24) through a mailing list. All were students working
in the same place, knew each other well, and interacted on a daily
basis. We lent a Fitbit Zip to participants who did not own a Fitbit.

5.3

Go & Grow Deployment

The individuals placed the plant at a location of their choice at
home. Three set up their plant in their kitchen, one in their bedroom

IF ABSTRACT

WAS MOTIVATED BY HAVING A GOAL
GOAL BANKING WAS A GOOD THING

+50

AFTER PHASE 2

PLANT AS A
VISUALIZATION

169.1

+25
0
-25

19.4

14

31.6

35.7
19.5

9.4

36.3
20.7

-23.4

IMPROVED
NEUTRAL
DECLINED

ACTIVITY CHANGE SELF-ASSESSMENT
TOOK UNUSUAL WALKS
TOOK LATE WALKS TO REACH GOAL

NO YES

EVERYDAY HABITS CHANGED
NOT AT ALL

A LOT

THE PLANT
GOT AWARE OF
ACTIVITY BY
LOOKING AT:

NO YES

THE WATER TANK
THE FITBIT DEVICE
THE DASHBOARD

NEVER
>1/WEEK
>1/DAY

AFFECTED HIS/HER BEHAVIOUR NOT AT ALL

A LOT

[G] MAKES THE DATA HIDDEN/SEMI-PRIVATE
REFLECTS WELL THE DATA AT A HIGH LEVEL
MOTIVATES BECAUSE ALIVE / AESTHETIC

NO NEUTRAL YES

IS MORE ENGAGING THAN A VIRTUAL ONE
LOOKED AT THE PLANT N TIMES EACH DAY

EMOTIONAL
CONNECTION

NO YES
BAD BOTH GOOD

STEP COUNT CHANGE (%)

GOT MORE AWARE OF ACTIVITY LEVEL

Study Design

HAD PRIDE

0 1 2 3 4+
NO

A BIT YES

HAD AN EMOTIONAL CONNECTION
FELT RESPONSIBLE

NO YES

FELT GUILTY WHEN INACTIVE

FUTURE SOCIAL
USE
CONTEXT

The study consisted of two phases, with each phase being followed by a recorded semi-structured interview.
Phase 1 consisted of a three-week period during which participants wore a Fitbit tracker. During this phase, we determined the
average daily step count of each participant as a baseline that we
later used to determine their daily goals. The first phase lasted three
weeks to limit the novelty effect, because most people stop using
their tracking device after three weeks [32]. After the first phase, we
conducted short (15–30 min) entry interviews and collected participants’ demographics, levels of activity, previous experiences with PI
systems, and thoughts on the study. We asked participants to name
their plant, both for privacy purposes and to initiate the emotional
connection. The second phase began right after the entry interviews.
Phase 2 consisted of a three-week period using Go & Grow. We
linked the Fitbit accounts of participants to their Go & Grow system.
We set the daily step count goal of participants to be their average
daily step count during Phase 1 plus 10% – so that participants
would have to walk a bit more than usual. We introduced them to
the online dashboard, and told them to sync their Fitbit at least once
a day. At 11pm every day, participants who had not synced their
Fitbit yet would receive an email reminding them to sync. At the end
of Phase 2, we conducted 20-40 min semi-structured exit interviews
containing both questionnaire questions and open questions.
Conditions: The only design criteria which is not enforced by Go
& Grow is DC4: sharing the representation. Thus, we considered
two types of participants. Individuals have their Go & Grow at home
and do not interact with other participants of the study. Group participants are friends placed in a competitive setting, with the plants
of all group participants being side-by-side in a shared workplace.

NO NEUTRAL YES

FEEL GOAL WILL BE DIFFICULT TO REACH
[G] CONFORTABLE
WITH DATA IN PUBLIC:

5.

NO YES

[G] SENSE OF COMPETITION

[G] PLANT WAS A TOPIC OF CONVERSATION

NO YES

[I] TALKED ABOUT IT WITH FRIENDS/FAMILY
FELT SOCIAL PRESSURE
WOULD KEEP USING THE SYSTEM
ACTUALLY KEPT USING THE SYSTEM

NO

A BIT YES

NO MAYBE YES
NO YES

Figure 4: Topics and categories are in rows. [G] / [I] indicate that the row concerns only group participants / individuals.
Participants are in columns; G[1-5] are group participants, I[15] individuals, {G, I}average averages. Cross indicate no data.
and one in their living room; all were near a window. For the
group participants, we built a Go & Grow with one Raspberry Pi
controlling five pumps, each connected to one plant. We set up
this system in the semi-public lunch area, next to the main entrance
of the workplace. Because plants were given names, participants
did not know which plant belonged to whom. Since there were no
windows nearby, we added a LED light fixture to illuminate the
plants during day hours (see Figure 3).

6.

RESULTS

We transcribed entry and exit interviews and complemented them
with the numerical Likert scale answers. We analyzed the transcripts
using open coding and affinity diagramming. We extracted 112
codes that we organized into 41 categories. We then grouped related
categories into 8 emerging topics. We used Bertifier [29] to create
Figure 4, presenting the summary of these results. The results from
the entry interviews are summarized in the “Before Phase 2” section
in Figure 4. We report the results from “After Phase 2” section in
more detail below, according to the topics listed in Figure 4.
Goals. All seven participants who mentioned goals found it
motivating to have a goal. This motivation was not always directly
related to the plant, e.g., “I was more obsessed with reaching the
100% than actually watering the plant” [I3]. Five participants
enjoyed goal banking, e.g., “it was nice to know that even if I was

not getting all of my steps done today, my plant was still getting
water” [G5]. However, I4 found it demotivating: “if I had steps
carry over then I didn’t really care to do that many that day” [I4].
Activity Change. All but G4 increased their average step count
during Phase 2 compared to Phase 1. Five participants felt that they
had improved their activity level during the past three weeks.
Behaviour Change. All but two participants mentioned taking
unusual walks. These walks included: asking friends to go for a
walk, e.g., “I would tell my friends that we have to go for a walk
because I need steps” [G1]; taking a walk with their dog, e.g., “If
knew that I wasn’t going to hit it for a day then I would go take [dog]
for a walk” [I1]; and extending walks, e.g., “if I was at the end of
a walk and I see that I still haven’t reached my step goal yet by a
little bit then I would extend the walk” [I3]. I2 also changed their
behaviour for steps banking instead of for reaching the goal that
day: “I was going on vacation and I’m like oh well I should try get
an extra 300% [of water] before this just in case I don’t have access
[to internet]” [I2]. Seven participants mentioned taking unusual
walks late in the day to reach their goal, e.g., “when I wasn’t at my
goal . . . I would pace back and forth down the hallway” [I1].
Six found that their everyday habits had changed during the study.
These changes include walking instead of being inactive, e.g., “when
I wasn’t doing anything then I would go ’well I might as well go for
a walk and get some steps in” [I2]; changing meeting habits, e.g.,
“just for both our sakes, we do walking meetings now” [I5]; being
more consistent, e.g., “I feel I’ve developed a habit now so that’s
awesome” [I3]; and changing the way of doing everyday things,
e.g., “If I was very close to my goal at night, make sure it will get
a whole bunch of extra steps, like bouncing around. Or when you
brush your teeth, you walk back and forth” [G5].
Increased Awareness. Nine participants mentioned that they
either became aware of their activity level, e.g., “it created an
awareness of how sedentary I am” [I5], or became more aware than
before, e.g., “It’s not like I didn’t know about those numbers before
but now I feel . . . I should be on top of this a bit more.” [G4]. Five
participants said that they gained their activity awareness by looking
at the plant; two by looking at the water; all by looking at the Fitbit
multiple times a day and at the dashboard at least once a week.
Plant as a Visualization. Participants told us that the plant affected their behaviour by an average score of 3.3 (1: not at all; 5: a
lot). Three group participants liked that the plant showed their data
in a semi-private way, e.g., “I could compare in a way but not really.
I like how it was hidden” [G4]. Four participants mentioned that
the plant represented their data at a high level, e.g., “it was pretty
responsive to being watered. . . . I think if you didn’t see a big visual
difference then it wouldn’t have been as motivating” [I1]. Others
were more neutral, e.g., “it wasn’t a very precise display” [G5].
All but two mentioned the aesthetics and the living aspects of
the plant as factors of motivation, e.g., “It was kinda interesting to
observe these flowers grow and bloom” [I3]. They all stated that
they would not have felt the same with a virtual plant. The fact that
the plant can die was the most frequent comment, e.g., “a plant is a
living organism. With a virtual plant, if it dies then you don’t really
care” [G3], and “I feel like with a virtual plant I could always sign
up for a new account . . . but with a real flower, I could kill it” [G4].
Emotional Connection. All but one participant looked at their
plant at least once a day. Eight felt pride, mentioning their plant to
friends, e.g., “I told [friend] about it . . . people thought it was cool”
[G2], colleagues, e.g., “I would start proudly talking about my plant”
[G3], and family members, e.g., “I showed it to my family. I showed
a picture to a couple of people” [I4]. Others had secret pride, e.g.,
“I have secret pride in my plant, it didn’t die, that’s really nice” [G5].
Six told us about their emotional connection with their plant, e.g.,

“I developed a connection with the plant” [I1]. Some mentioned
caring about the plant as if it was a pet, e.g., “It was almost like
. . . having a pet . . . you’re taking care of it” [G3]. Two did not feel
connected to the plant, e.g., “I just didn’t connect to the plant” [I5].
All but two mentioned that they felt responsible to keep the plant
alive and healthy, e.g., “I didn’t want it to die! I felt responsible”
[I1]. Some talked about the long-term impact of this responsibility,
e.g., “I wasn’t just thinking about it for the first week then forgetting
about it. I was actively conscious . . . the entire time that my flower
was dependent on my performance” [G3].
Five mentioned guilt, e.g., “If I didn’t water it then I was feeling
guilty” [I1], in several ways, including: because of their laziness,
e.g., “I’d felt kind of mean if it didn’t get watered just because
I didn’t feel like walking” [G5]; because they were not properly
watering the plant, e.g., “I still felt guilty when I didn’t have at least
100% water every night” [I3]; and when they received an automatic
email, e.g., “Every time I got an email . . . I would feel guilty” [G2].
Social Context. Four group participants mentioned that the plants
were a common point for discussion with colleagues, e.g., “It was
actually quite entertaining to . . . have a common point to talk about.
We stood around the plants and discussed” [G3]. They all talked
about their plant with family and friends, e.g., “They [friends/family]
still ask me about how my plant is doing every time they see me now,
so it’s a constant reminder to keep being active” [I3].
Six participants felt social pressure during the study. Other people
seeing their plants motivated group participants, e.g., “I would have
found it embarrassing if it weren’t doing well, because people were
paying attention to the plants” [G5]; as well as having their plant
being compared to other plants, e.g., “I didn’t want my plant to be
the worst looking one” [G4]. Individuals mentioned positive social
pressure coming from both family members and friends, e.g., “if it
started dying then [my family] would say something about it” [I3].
Future Use. After three weeks of Phase 2, we offered the participants the opportunity to keep using the system. Eight decided
to continue. The two who did not keep using it had reasons that
interfered: I1 moved to a new city and could not take the plant with
them and I4 lost the Fitbit tracker on the day of the exit interview.

7.

DISCUSSION

Overall, participants increased their awareness of their activity
level. During the three weeks of the study, participants also changed
their habits towards a more active lifestyle. Based on our results,
we discuss i) the impact of a living visualization, and ii) people’s
diversities as a factor when designing PI tools. We then introduce
iii) the Goal Motivation Model, which is based on the degree of goal
abstraction, captures different motivations, and supports diversity.

7.1

The Impact of a Living Visualization

Our results indicate that the emotional commitment to the living visualization is a key factor in motivating and engaging people
towards improving their activity level. Participants connected emotionally to their plant – all mentioned that they did not want to let
their plant die. Participants felt sadness, guilt, and pride towards
their plant, and even compared the plant to a pet. The two participants who first told us that they did not feel connected to the plant
later told us the opposite. I3 initially said “I personally feel very
indifferent about the plant” but later expressed feelings of responsibility for the plant (“I feel some kind of self-obligation every night
to make sure that I’ve gotten enough steps”); felt guilt (“I felt kinda
guilty if I didn’t have enough water by the end of the day”); and
cared for the life of the plant (“I would not have cared at all if the
flower was virtual”). I3 further said that the plant affected their
behaviour: “I would be about to eat . . . something fattening then I

would see the plant and that would somehow make me feel guilty.”;
concluding “I did care about [the plant] unconsciously”.
This emotional commitment is probably due to the living visualizations being different from raw numbers, standard visualizations,
and virtual metaphors, because they are alive. Although the plant
is not the method by which people gain the most information about
their activity level, it is the plant that the participants committed to
the most. A living visualization gives meaning to an otherwise less
meaningful goal of reaching an arbitrary numerical goal.

7.2

Goal Meaningfulness
Goal Abstractness

high
Social
Goal

Emotional Goal

Substitute
Goal

Numerical
Goal

9768

Considering the Facets of Diversity

People tracking or willing to track their activity data have diverse
activity levels, goals, and motivation; they cannot be reduced to one
single kind of stereotyped person. Our results highlight four types
of diversity: 1) of activity levels, 2) of schedules, 3) of motivations
and goals, and 4) of strategies for accomplishing goals.
1. Diversity of activity levels. People have an activity level ranging from nearly nothing to extremely high. However, standard tools
do not consider this diversity. For example, Fitbit.com attributes the
exact same goal of 10,000 daily steps to any new user.
Preset goals may be impossible to reach for someone with a low
activity level. People with low activity levels in our study committed
to the plant and did not care much about the actual numbers. These
people still benefit from the social commitment since: i) the raw
data is difficult to read because a living visualization is an abstract
representation; and ii) both a professional athlete and a non-active
person can compare their living visualizations because the goal is
set to be relative to the activity of the person.
In contrast, people with high activity levels in our study tended to
commit more to the numerical value than to the plant.
2. Diversity of schedules. When people have relatively consistent schedules, a daily goal is reasonable and favours consistency.
Some of our participants had erratic schedules, unexpected events,
deadlines, illnesses—a few of the many factors that can disturb daily
activities. They may be discouraged quickly if their goal has to
be reached every day. The living visualization and goal banking
helped tackle this issue. First, the living visualization is a forgiving
visualization. having less water for a couple of days altered the
plant’s appearance slightly, but did not kill it. This results in minor
punishments for someone who had been less active for a day or two.
Second, goal banking can be capitalized. Goal banking consisted
of capitalizing extra amounts of water. Participants used the stored
water on days when they could not reach their goal.
3. Diversity of motivations and goals. Motivators included
having a healthy plant, earning water, and achieving a numerical
goal. In fact, participants were motivated by several of these aspects
at once and pursued them with varying degrees of commitment.
Even those with a low activity level, whose motivation mostly came
from the plant and the social context, sometimes gained motivation
for achieving the numerical goal. Inversely, those with a high activity level, mostly motivated by the numerical goal, also gained
motivation through the social context, the water level, and the plant.
4. Diversity of strategies for accomplishing goals. Our results
revealed three strategies that participants employed to ensure that
their plant would receive the maximum amount of water every day:
• Changing everyday habits is a long-term behaviour change,
that occurred for participants who preferred to change everyday habits rather than having erratic behaviours, typically by
taking the stairs instead of the elevator and walking to work;
• Planning for inactivity is a mid-term behaviour change that
occurred when participants anticipated a period of inactivity.
They banked water by taking long walks the days before to
ensure that their plant would get enough water everyday;

low

Commitment

Awareness

Commitment

Living
Visualization

Awareness

Commitment

Social
Context

Awareness

Abstracted
Activity

Precise
Activity
Tracker

Commitment

Awareness

Figure 5: Goal Motivation Model. The four levels of goal
abstraction—activity tracker, abstracted activity, living visualization, and social context—play a role in one’ awareness and
behaviour change and have a commitment–awareness tradeoff.
• Reacting under pressure is a short-term behaviour change that
occurred when participants realized that they would not reach
their daily goal, typically by taking walks late at night.
Summary. Standard ways of visualizing personal activity data
tend to be generic approaches which do not consider these facets
of diversity. Our results show that these facets of diversity are all
factors of engagement. Based on this observation, we introduce
the Goal Motivation Model, which supports and even encourages
considering the facets of diversity when designing PI tools.

7.3

Goal Motivation Model

From our results we derive the Goal Motivation Model, illustrated
in Figure 5, that supports and encourages considering the facets
of diversity. This model, based on the degree of abstractness of
visualizations, results in a tradeoff between an person’s commitment
to a goal and their awareness of their activity level. We describe the
four levels of abstraction that surround a person in this model.
1. The precise activity tracker is the standard activity monitoring tool that provides a concrete numerical goal. Few people
commit to this numerical goal, as evidenced by the quick drop off
from activity trackers [32]. On the other hand, this level is the most
powerful way for people to increase their awareness by providing
them with precise numbers. In our study, even participants who
already used an activity tracker and an online dashboard before the
study became more aware of their activity level. Our interpretation
is that people can increase their awareness of their activity level
through activity trackers if they have an external motivation to look
at their device every day—the plant in our study. This was echoed
by our participants, e.g., “Before, sometimes I wouldn’t even check it
at all for a couple of days, but during the study I would check every
day to make sure that my plant would get watered” [G4]. In brief,
this level provides the most precise information about the activity,
but does not seem to engage people to commit to a goal.
2. The abstracted activity is the intermediate level between the
precise activity tracker and the abstract living visualization. Water
level does provide a slightly abstract visualization, similar to a bar
chart. This level results in a substitute goal to the goal of reaching a
number of steps. The key point is that the step count is not an end
in itself, and neither is the earned amount of water. In this cascaded
approach, the step count goal is a means by which people can collect
water; the height of water goal is a means by which they can achieve

their concrete goal—maintaining a living entity. Some people may
focus on this activity measure instead of their step count, since the
abstracted measure contributes more directly to their goal of keeping
the plant alive. The abstracted activity shown by the water level
also provides people with more awareness than the plant because
the activity level is represented in a less abstract way. The substitute
goal can also be used to bank abstracted activity.
3. The living visualization results in an emotional goal. People
emotionally connect to the living visualization, and commit to the
meaningful goal of keeping it healthy. They commit to achieving
this goal because the visualization is a living entity whose life
depends on their activity. They feel sad when the living entity looks
unhealthy; proud when it looks healthy; and guilty when they are
inactive. This variety of feelings does not occur when looking at
numbers or bar charts. Although the living visualization results in
a strong commitment towards the goal of keeping a living entity
healthy, it does not provide people with much awareness of their
activity level. This is due to the abstractness of the visualization,
which in particular does not reflect short-term activity changes.
4. The social context surrounds the person with regards to the
living visualization. This context can include other people tracking
their fitness data in a competitive/comparative setting with friends,
family, and colleagues. Social context creates positive pressure to
maintain the living visualization’s health, creating a social goal.
This social goal relates to Fogg’s [8] principles of competition,
cooperation, and recognition, which bring intrinsic motivation. In
this level, the social goal is meaningful: it consists of feeling proud
of the health of the living visualization in front of other people.
The entourage does not know the numerical value associated to the
person’s goal, and does not need to know how the living visualization
is maintained. They just know that the health of the plant is somehow
related to the level of activity of the person.
Goal Motivation Model and the facets of diversity. The model
supports all facets of diversity discussed in section 7.2. It supports
the diversity of activity levels, ranging from low to high, by using
leveled goals with increasing abstractness. It supports the diversity
of schedules, ranging from regular activity to erratic schedules, by
1) letting people commit to the forgivable living visualization; and
by 2) providing them with a way to compensate inactive days with
very active days. It supports the diversity of motivations and goals
and the diversity of strategies for accomplishing goals, because it
is flexible, which lets people decide the degree of abstractness they
commit to and their strategy to reach their goal(s). This model
relates to Fogg’s [8] functional triad. Participants in our study were
motivated by all three aspects of the functional triad (social aspect,
tool and medium), however, with a commitment–awareness tradeoff
illustrated in Figure 5 according to participants’ diversity.

7.4

Limitations and Future Work

Our qualitative study revealed the existence of factors of engagement with personal activity data. The purpose of this study was to
shed light on these factors and to deepen our understanding of what
motivates people in tracking and self-reflecting on their personal
activity data. Like many similar studies, the short duration of our
study makes it difficult to claim that people changed their long-term
behaviour. Instead, this work opens the space of using living visualizations for personal data. Our results will inform further research
in this area, and we suggest different strategies to expand both the
Go & Grow system and the Goal Motivation Model in the future.
Long-term response: While our study unveiled interesting results,
a longer study would be able to explore the long-term effects of a
living visualization on awareness and behaviour change. However,
the fact that eight participants kept using the system after the end of

the study is a positive indicator of enduring interest in the system.
Confounding factors: More studies are needed to fully understand
the effect of individual factors on motivation and awareness.
Limits of goal banking: Goal banking allowed for forgiveness.
However, having an excess of earned water discouraged some participants from being active. A limit could be placed on the amount of
water stored, or water accumulation could be prevented by adjusting
the daily goal based on recent performance. Gradually increasing
their step goal would actively challenge those who have increased
their activity level. Similarly, gradually decreasing the step goal of
those who have been struggling could provide encouragement.
Beyond steps and water: Other controls could be applied to other
factors that influence a plant’s growth, e.g., varying amounts of light
and adding fertilizer. Similarly, step count does not fully represent
one’s activity level. Other metrics such as heart rate, calories burnt
and floors climbed, could be used to control different parameters
that affect plant growth, e.g., lighting according to floors climbed,
adding fertilizer according to calories burnt, etc.
Timeliness of change: The plant gave little short term feedback of
activity level. Short term feedback could be increased by adding dye
to the water, which travels up the plant and tints the petals. A plant
that receives more water would be more vibrantly coloured. Making
the living visualization less abstract in the Goal Motivation Model
would affect the tradeoff between the timeliness of change of the
plant and the abstractness of the visualization. Abstractness offers
forgiveness and privacy—two important factors of engagement.
Ethical issues: Living visualizations are not constrained to plants.
Some participants made a parallel between taking care of a plant
and taking care of a pet, which raises some important ethical issues.

8.

CONCLUSIONS

We explored living visualizations as a tool to engage individuals
to gain awareness of their activity level and motivate them to be
more active. We designed, implemented, and evaluated Go & Grow
as a proof of concept of living visualizations. By linking individuals’ step count to the amount of water that their plant receives, we
revealed unexplored aspects of personal activity tracking. Notably,
we found that individuals emotionally commit to the goal of keeping
the living visualization alive, regardless of their activity level. Living visualizations differ from existing tools and virtual metaphors,
because they trigger feelings such as pride, sadness and guilt.
By analyzing the results from our study, we distilled four goals
with different levels of abstractness that individuals can commit to,
based on which we built the Goal Motivation Model. This model
considers the diversity of individuals, thus supports and encourages
diverse strategies for accomplishing goals. Because it encompasses
four levels of goal abstractness, it can be applied beyond activity
tracking, paving the way for designing technologies that will help
individuals commit to personal goals in their everyday life.

9.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part by NSERC, SMART Technologies, and AITF. We thank the participants to our study. We also
thank Tamara Flemisch, Terrance Mok, and Tiffany Wun for proofreading the paper; as well as David Ledo for drawing our fictional
character, Anna.

10.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Bartram. Design challenges and opportunities for
eco-feedback in the home. IEEE CG&A, 35(4):52–62, 2015.
[2] S. Berkovsky, M. Coombe, J. Freyne, D. Bhandari, and
N. Baghaei. Physical activity motivating games: Virtual

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

rewards for real activity. In Proc. CHI, pages 243–252. ACM,
2010.
S. Consolvo, K. Everitt, I. Smith, and J. A. Landay. Design
requirements for technologies that encourage physical activity.
In Proc. CHI, pages 457–466. ACM, 2006.
S. Consolvo, P. Klasnja, D. W. McDonald, D. Avrahami,
J. Froehlich, L. LeGrand, R. Libby, K. Mosher, and J. A.
Landay. Flowers or a robot army?: Encouraging awareness &
activity with personal, mobile displays. In Proc. UbiComp,
pages 54–63. ACM, 2008.
S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, and J. A. Landay.
Theory-driven design strategies for technologies that support
behavior change in everyday life. In Proc. CHI, pages
405–414. ACM, 2009.
S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, T. Toscos, M. Y. Chen,
J. Froehlich, B. Harrison, P. Klasnja, A. LaMarca, L. LeGrand,
R. Libby, I. Smith, and J. A. Landay. Activity sensing in the
wild: A field trial of ubifit garden. In Proc. CHI, pages
1797–1806. ACM, 2008.
C. Feng, L. Bartram, and B. E. Riecke. Evaluating affective
features of 3d motionscapes. In Proc. SAP, pages 23–30.
ACM, 2014.
B. Fogg. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change
What We Think and Do. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.,
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2002.
R. Gasser, D. Brodbeck, M. Degen, J. Luthiger, R. Wyss, and
S. Reichlin. Persuasiveness of a mobile lifestyle coaching
application using social facilitation. In Proc. PERSUASIVE,
pages 27–38. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
W. Hardeman, S. Griffin, M. Johnston, A. L. Kinmonth, and
N. J. Wareham. Interventions to prevent weight gain: a
systematic review of psychological models and behaviour
change methods. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord.,
24(2):131–143, Feb 2000.
D. Harrison, P. Marshall, N. Berthouze, and J. Bird. Tracking
physical activity: Problems related to running longitudinal
studies with commercial devices. In Proc. UbiComp, pages
699–702. ACM, 2014.
J. Haviland-Jones, R. Hale, and T. McGuire. An Environmental Approach to Positive Emotion: Flowers, Evolutionary
Psychology. Evolutionary Psychology, pages 104–132, 2005.
J. O. Hill, H. R. Wyatt, G. W. Reed, and J. C. Peters. Obesity
and the environment: where do we go from here? Science,
299(5608):853–855, 2003.
D. Holstius, J. Kembel, A. Hurst, P.-H. Wan, and J. Forlizzi.
Infotropism: Living and robotic plants as interactive displays.
In Proc. DIS, pages 215–221. ACM, 2004.
D. Huang, M. Tory, B. Aseniero, L. Bartram, S. Bateman,
S. Carpendale, A. Tang, and R. Woodbury. Personal
visualization and personal visual analytics. IEEE TVCG,
21(3):420–433, March 2015.
Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, P. Isenberg, J. Alexander, A. Karnik,
J. Kildal, S. Subramanian, and K. Hornbæk. Opportunities and
challenges for data physicalization. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’15, pages 3227–3236. ACM, 2015.
R. A. Khot, L. Hjorth, and F. F. Mueller. Understanding
physical activity through 3d printed material artifacts. In Proc.
CHI ’14, pages 3835–3844. ACM, 2014.
E. J. Langer and J. Rodin. The effects of choice and enhanced
personal responsibility for the aged: a field experiment in an

institutional setting. J Pers Soc Psychol, 34(2):191–198, 1976.
[19] M.-H. Lee, S. Cha, and T.-J. Nam. Patina engraver:
Visualizing activity logs as patina in fashionable trackers. In
Proc. CHI, pages 1173–1182. ACM, 2015.
[20] I. Li, A. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. A stage-based model of personal
informatics systems. In Proc. CHI, pages 557–566. ACM,
2010.
[21] I. Li, A. K. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. Understanding my data,
myself: Supporting self-reflection with ubicomp technologies.
In Proc. UbiComp, pages 405–414. ACM, 2011.
[22] J. J. Lin, L. Mamykina, S. Lindtner, G. Delajoux, and H. B.
Strub. Fish’n’steps: Encouraging physical activity with an
interactive computer game. In Proc. UbiComp, pages
261–278. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[23] E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham. Building a practically useful
theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey.
American Psychologist, 57(9):705, 2002.
[24] B. H. Marcus, L. H. Forsyth, E. J. Stone, P. M. Dubbert, T. L.
McKenzie, A. L. Dunn, and S. N. Blair. Physical activity
behavior change: issues in adoption and maintenance. Health
Psychology, 19(1S):32, 2000.
[25] J. H. Murray. Inventing the Medium: Principles of Interaction
Design As a Cultural Practice. The MIT Press, 2011.
[26] V. Nenonen, A. Lindblad, V. Häkkinen, T. Laitinen,
M. Jouhtio, and P. Hämäläinen. Using heart rate to control an
interactive game. In Proc. CHI, pages 853–856. ACM, 2007.
[27] D. Norman. Emotion & design: Attractive things work better.
interactions, 9(4):36–42, July 2002.
[28] C. North. Toward measuring visualization insight. IEEE
CG&A, 26(3):6–9, May 2006.
[29] C. Perin, P. Dragicevic, and J.-D. Fekete. Revisiting bertin
matrices: New interactions for crafting tabular visualizations.
IEEE TVCG, 20(12):2082–2091, Dec 2014.
[30] Z. Pousman, J. Stasko, and M. Mateas. Casual information
visualization: Depictions of data in everyday life. IEEE
TVCG, 13(6):1145–1152, Nov. 2007.
[31] J. Rodgers and L. Bartram. Exploring ambient and artistic
visualization for residential energy use feedback. IEEE TVCG,
17(12):2489–2497, Dec 2011.
[32] P. C. Shih, K. Han, E. S. Poole, M. B. Rosson, and J. M.
Carroll. Use and adoption challenges of wearable activity
trackers. In Proc. iConference, 2015.
[33] B. J. Speck and S. W. Looney. Effects of a minimal
intervention to increase physical activity in women: daily
activity records. Nursing Research, 50(6):374–8, 2001.
[34] S. Stusak, A. Tabard, F. Sauka, R. Khot, and A. Butz. Activity
sculptures: Exploring the impact of physical visualizations on
running activity. IEEE TVCG, 20(12):2201–2210, Dec 2014.
[35] A. Thudt, D. Baur, and S. Huron. Visual mementos: Reflecting memories with personal data. IEEE TVCG, 2015.
[36] X. Tong, D. Gromala, L. Bartram, F. Rajabiyazdi, and
S. Carpendale. Evaluating the effectiveness of three physical
activity visualizations — how people perform vs perceive. In
IEEE VIS Electronic Proceedings, 2015.
[37] A. Vande Moere. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel: Exploring
the physicality of information visualization. In Proc. IV, pages
469–474, July 2008.
[38] S. Wang, Y. Tanahashi, N. Leaf, and K.-L. Ma. Design and
effects of personal visualizations. IEEE CG&A, 35(4):82–93,
July 2015.

