Infotropism: Living and Robot ic Plant s
as Int eract ive Displays
David Holstius 1
dholstiu@cmu.edu
1

John Kembel

1

jkembel@cs.cmu.edu

Amy Hurst 1

Peng-Hui Wan 3

Jodi Forlizzi 1,2

akhurst@cmu.edu

maffee@cmu.edu

forlizzi@cs.cmu.edu

Human-Computer Interaction Institute
2
School of Design
3
School of Architecture

Abstract
Designers often borrow from the natural world to achieve
pleasing, unobtrusive designs. We have extended this practice by combining living plants with sensors and lights in an
interactive display, and by creating a robotic analogue that
mimics phototropic behavior. In this paper, we document
our design process and report the results of a 2-week field
study. We put our living plant display, and its robotic counterpart, in a cafeteria between pairs of trash and recycling
containers. Contributions of recyclables or trash triggered
directional bursts of light that gradually induced the plant
displays to lean toward the more active container. In interviews, people offered explanations for the displays and spoke
of caring for the plants. A marginally significant increase in
recycling behavior (p=.08) occurred at the display with living plants. Apparent increases also occurred at the robotic
display and a unit with only lights. Our findings indicate
value in exploring the use of living material and biomimetic
forms in displays, and in using lightweight robotics to deliver simple rewards.
Cate gorie s & S ubject De scriptors: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces –
evaluation/methodology, prototyping, user-centered design
Ge ne ral Te rms: Design, Experimentation.
Ke ywords: plants, robots, ambient displays, recycling,
interactive displays, biomimetics.
INTRODUCTIO N
Motivation
Borrowing materials or metaphors from the nonliving part of
the natural world, such as water or wind, is now an established practice in the design of interactive displays [1,2].
Some designers draw more deeply upon the living part of
nature, imitating biological forms and behaviors with artificial materials and techniques (biomimetics) [3,4,5]. We have
extended these practices by combining living organisms
with electronic components in an interactive display.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
DIS2004, August 1–4, 2004, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-787-7/04/0008...$5.00.

Carnegie-Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Figure 1. A group of living plants displaying information.

We decided to use plants in our initial exploration of this
design space. We were inspired by the observation that
plants are naturally informative. Plants are constantly accumulating and displaying the effect of stimuli over time in a
form that humans can interpret. For example, houseplants
generally point toward the primary source of light in a room,
and an accumulations of moss on a tree trunk indicates the
direction North. Both of these examples showcase the ambient quality of plants as well as their legibility and simplicity. They also suggest that plants could be most appropriately used in a display of local information aggregated over
time.
Since plant behavior is constrained in familiar ways, we
thought that plants could contribute to a unique legibility in
an interactive display. In discussing the design of tangible
interfaces, Ishii et al. describe gains realized from respecting
users’ prior understanding of physical principles: “People
know what to expect of a flashlight, know what to expect of
lenses.” [2] We thought this reasoning might be extended to
biology. People know what to expect of plants.
We also thought the aliveness of plants could contribute to a
compelling and engaging emotional quality in our design. If
people’s affinity for other living things were to translate into
a receptivity to living things used as displays, we would
expect such displays to be engaging and compelling. People
might alter their behavior more, or for longer, in light of
relevant information presented by a living or lifelike display.
In certain contexts the effect could be measurable.

Re late d Work
A number of related works have used plants and plant forms
to fill functional, aesthetic, and conceptual roles. Some feature artificial plant forms enhanced with interactive capabilities. LaughingLily is an artificial flower augmented with
microphones and electromagnets that make the petals respons to the volume of nearby conversation [3]. Office Plant
#1 actuates aluminum plant-like structures in response to a
user’s email activity, and “fills the same social and emotional niche as an office plant.” [4] CyberFlora is a commissioned exhibit for the Cooper-Hewitt Smithsonian Museum
featuring 20 robotic flowers sensitive to temperature, infrared
light, and capacitance [5].
Artists have used living plants as media and environmental
probes. Ackroyd and Harvey imprinted complex images and
patterns on live seedling grass, using varying levels of light
intensity [6]. Jeremijenko created the OneTree project, which
used plants as distributed sensors and recording devices [7].
Pehrson connected a Yucca plant to a stock trading program
via electrodes, giving the plant water in return for successful
trades [8]. Goldberg’s Telegarden connects human gardeners
to a remote garden via a web-interfaced robotic arm [9].
Our living plant display contributes to this design space in a
new way by combining living plants with local interactivity.
Our robotic plant is the first to imitate a phototropic response in order to convey information. Both of these artifacts embody and exemplify a changing relationship between
the living and the artificial.
DE S IGN P RO CE S S

Figure 2. Concept sketch of possible manipulations.

Figure 3. Clockwise, from upper left: (1) bending plants
toward light, (2) tilting container while plant grows upward, (3) influencing health with nutrition, (4) using light
to control side shoots, budding, and/or height.

Ide ation P hase
Our design process began with the idea of using living
plants to convey information about human activity. We had
two initial goals: (1) to make an interesting, relevant display; and (2) to use plants in a novel yet appropriate way.
We explored these initial goals through a series of concepts.

Plant Manipulations
We initially researched alternatives based on plant responses
to a variety of stimuli. Plants are sensitive to touch (thigmonasty), orientation (negative gravitotropism), and water
sources (hydrotropism). (Figure 2) We also considered
changing the health of plants by giving and withholding
nutrition. An undesirable state of affairs could be communicated by an unhealthy plant, and vice versa.
We focused on the idea of manipulating plants with light,
because of its simplicity. Light can influence the health of
plants, but it can also change their shape and direction of
growth. (Figure 3) For example, low pressure sodium light
results in thick stems, multiple side shoots, and deep green
foliage, while incandescent light results in elongated stems,
suppression of side shoots, and paling of foliage [10]. We
realized that by using light to bend plants from left to right,
in a vertical plane, we could produce a form similar to a needle gauge. (Figure 4) This would be less ambiguous than
other manipulations. Although it would limit us to presenting ordinal data, this worked well with our subject matter.

Figure 4. “Needle gauge” design for ordinal information.

Recycling as a Subject Matter
We chose recycling as a subject matter while considering a
cafeteria as a space for a public display. People could
anonymously interact with such a display, but it would still
deliver interesting, personally relevant information. Recycling is dispersed over time, but localized in space, as are the
stimuli to which plants usually respond. Also, recycling is a
practice in which individuals often feel their actions have no
effect, and yet aggregate behavior has a very real effect.
We decided to map contributions of recyclables and trash
into bursts of directional light, directed toward either side of
a group of plants. If the trash side received more light than
the recycling side, the plants would eventually lean toward
the trash. This would communicate a very simple idea,
which is that people throw away more than they recycle.

Biomimetic Robot Plant Concept
While generating concepts for our living plant display, we
realized this was an opportunity to exhibit a robotic analogue
in tandem with a living display. We began developing prototypes in parallel, cultivating living plants while sketching
and constructing robotic plant components.
P rototyping P hase

Living Plant Display
We consulted with local horticulturalists and greenhouse
workers to determine what varieties of plants would be suitable for our design. While some mature plant varieties are
highly responsive (sunflowers, for example, follow the sun
precisely), vegetable seedlings are very responsive in general.
After testing and rejecting beans, peas, radishes, carrots, and
mimosae obtained from gardening supply stores, we settled
on corn seedlings. These offered the advantages of a pleasing, easily imitable form and dramatic growth over a 1-week
period. We planted the seeds 1” apart in aluminum bowls
filled with Miracle-Gro® AquaCoir™ soil, keeping duplicate bowls growing in case of accidental damage.
We also tested various lights, including fluorescent, incandescent, and halogen bulbs, in conjunction with the growing
plants. Timing the plants’ response, we found that a visible
lean resulted from 8 hrs/day exposure to 100W Sylvania
“Daylight” bulbs in only 3-4 days. We used these bulbs in
our final design.
Biomimetic Robot Plant Display
As we explored different species of living plants, we generated multiple sculptural forms, materials, and leaning behaviors for a robotic analogue. (Figure 5)
We started by considering ways to mimic the colors, textures, and shapes of living plants. Purchasing silk plants was
one option, but silk plants generally imitate slow-growth
species. We opted for designs focused on mimicking phototropic behavior. In the end we settled on Calder-like [11]
planes of color in the shape of living corn sprouts. (Figure 7)
We considered making the electromechanical plants modular,
and equipping them with individual photosensors. (Figure
5) We simplified this by driving a group of plants and making them “infotropic” instead. Here, we incorporated a stamp
microprocessor (Figure 6) and implemented a custom serial
communication protocol. The robotic plants responded by
turning left or right as a group, in 5-degree increments.

Figure 5. Concept sketches for robotic plant behavior mimicking natural phototropism.

Figure 6. Inner workings of robotic plant display, showing
basic stamp, servos, and wireform sprouts.

Figure 7. Robotic plant development, left to right: early mechanism; Calder-like sprout forms; servo and sprout connected
by wire; Basic stamp controller; covering final assembly; view from above; final robotic display in public.

Figure 9. Progression of changes in both plant displays,
indicating more trash disposed than recycling. The living
plant is also exhibiting 4 days’ growth.

E V ALUATIO N

Figure 8. Final unit design with plant display in cafeteria.

We constrained the robotic display, like the living display,
to movement in a single plane. This served two purposes.
As previously discussed, it simplified information mapping,
and increased the legibility of the display. Second, it simplified the mechanical tasks involved. Although the robotic
sprouts rotated in a horizontal plane, while the living plants
grew and tilted in a vertical plane, the general effect of “leaning this way or that” was realized in both.

Unit Assembly
We used lamp dimmers and Eagle Eye motion sensors from
X10, a popular home-automation supplier [12]. Our trash
and recycling canisters had narrow openings, forcing users to
place rather than toss cans and bottles. The sensors would
detect the presence of a hand at these openings. However, we
had to restrict the sensors’ peripheral vision, so they would
not be overly responsive. We enclosed the sensors in triangular housings made of black foamcore, which had the drawback of making them more obvious. Sensors were networked
using extension cords to a central computer housed inside
one of the display stands. The computer turned lights on for
10 seconds when the sensors were triggered, and slowly
dimmed them to darkness. We used several Linux-based
freeware programs, including heyu and Xtend, to control the
X10 modules and record events.

1.1 S e tting
We evaluated our design with a two-week field study in our
building’s cafeteria. This cafeteria is frequented by faculty,
students and research scientists of high technical expertise.
Patrons are generally familiar with systematic methods of
experimentation. They are about 2/3 male, and most are between 18-27 years of age.
We kept the normal pairing and arrangement of trash and
recycling containers in the cafeteria. Research has shown the
proximity and availability of recycling containers influences
their use [13]. This meant we had 4 locations for our new
units, equally spaced around the perimeter of the room.
(Figure 10).
1.2 P rocedure

Baseline (Week 1)
For the first week, we introduced only the display stands,
trash and recycling containers, and sensors, without the
lights and plant displays. This gave people time to become
accustomed to our new designs. We began to weigh all trash
as it left the cafeteria, four times daily. We also handcounted, every night, the number of items recycled.

Figure 10. Arrangement of units in cafeteria. During Week
2 the initial conditions were: A=Control, B=Robot + Lights,
C=Living + Lights, and D=Lights. Locations of Robot and
Living displays were switched midweek.

Display Introduction (Week 2)
One week later, we created four display conditions: Control
(no lights or displays), Robot + Lights, Living + Lights,
and Lights. The locations of the plant displays were chosen
as the two most equivalent in terms of waste-disposal activity, as indicated by the previous week’s observations. On
Wednesday night, we exchanged the locations of the two
plant displays.
During the second week, we also conducted 13 10-minute
interviews with people we observed talking about, pointing
to, or interacting with at least one of the units featuring a
plant display. Respondents gave informed consent and were
asked a series of questions, about when they first noticed the
units, what they thought they were for, if they elicited any
feelings, and what effects the displays might be having.
When the study was over, we debriefed cafeteria patrons with
an 11x17" poster explaining the nature, purpose, and results
of our study. We affixed these to the walls where we had
introduced each new unit.
FINDINGS
S hort Inte rvie ws
Several themes emerged in the 13 interviews we carried out,
including eco-consciousness, exploration, experimentation,
appreciation, and interpretation.
Eco-consciousness. People reported first noticing the bright
green color of the display units or the plants, and linked
these to an “environmental” or “eco-conscious” theme.
Exploration. People described their attempts to understand
the displays: in this case, the robot plants.
“I don’t know, but I think it moved. Did it move? [Interviewer: Do
you think it moved?] Yeah, I think so, but… I don’t want to be
crazy. Maybe it didn’t move. I went back and tested it, to see. I
put some trash in. And then I put my hand underneath it. Did it?”

Three people related their attempts to “game the system” by
waving their hands underneath the motion sensors. The slow

motion of the displays was sometimes confusing: two people said the robot was “broken, because it’s not moving.”
Experimentation. Over half the respondents (8 of 13) were
sensitive to the fact that a study was taking place, using
words and phrases such as “experiment,” “conditions,” “testing human behavior,” “collecting data,” or “to see if” in
describing what they saw. Four respondents guessed some
part of our intention: either that we wanted to “determine the
recycling-to-trash ratio, or “encourage recycling.” One said,
“I think this is an experiment, to see if people throw away more
with fake plants. And then, with the real plants, will they recycle
more. [Interviewer: That’s interesting.] You’re kind of killing two
birds with one stone. Recycle a Coke, plant a tree.”

Appreciation. Asked how the units made her feel, one said
(pointing to the living plants):
“I like them. They’re so small. They look so dependent. I waved
my hands underneath to give them some light. I didn’t have a bottle. I like the bright green color. Green is very environmental. And
I like the way the cabinets and the lights go together.”

Another respondent declared,
“They made my day! All of these people are staring at these
things. I like to watch. They’re giving the plant extra light.”

Some people may not have noticed a difference between the
plant displays. Three thought both were real, or both
“fake”.One person liked the robot plants best:
There’s a nice aesthetic sense to them. It’s kinda cool to have robotic plants.

… while another said the living plants made more sense.
I saw the plastic plants first. The others make more sense. [Interviewer: They make more sense?] If they’re real plants. It’s more
clear.

Interpretation. Of the 13 people we interviewed, 5 described the mechanism of our invention in some way, e.g.,
“The plants gauge whether there’s more recycling than trash. If
they were the same then the plants would be straight up.”

We initially overheard one respondent saying:
“I get it! Whichever one you put it in, the light goes on. So be-

Figure 11. Changes in recycling during study. Dashed lines represent Week 1 (baseline). Solid lines represent Week 2 (conditions). Similar shapes represent the same condition across days. Recycling data are missing on Monday, Week 1.

cause they’re bending that way, people are throwing away
more.”

Three people characterized our design as artistic, or intending
to send a message. One remarked on their reflective function:
“There’s no need for it that I can articulate. It’s not being designed for a need, or a need like a lot of the stuff here is. It just fits
into the environment. It’s … making an awareness of a problem.
It’s giving people something, something that they can do what they
want with … It has got people actually thinking. You know,
‘hmm’ [looks thoughtful], and also it gets a good reaction. People
smile. There’s a magic. You don’t know what’s going to happen,
and then it goes, and there’s a sense of, wonder, I guess.”

Be havioral data
We generally observed an increase in recycling (Figure 11)
and no change in trash across Weeks 1 and 2. Our study was
only 2 weeks long, and we note that these increases were not
statistically significant. We would have run a longer study,
but Week 3 was our university’s Thanksgiving holiday.
There is reason to take into account both measures (trash and
recycling) simultaneously. After all, if trash had increased
much more than recycling, we would certainly not consider
that a positive change in behavior. After standardizing the
trash and recycling scores, and combining them in a ratio, a
MANOVA analysis indicates that the unit featuring living
plants started out worst and ended up best. This effect was
marginally significant, F[3, 9] = 3.1, p = .08. Though our
other quantitative results did not approach significance, the
effects were generally in the direction anticipated.
GE NE RAL DIS CUS SIO N
Our design succeeded as an interactive display. Several people we interviewed were able to easily interpret the leaning
behavior of the plants. People commented positively on the
aesthetic quality of the displays.
Our total design appeared to increase recycling behavior. The
gains we saw are probably due to a combination of factors.
First, the immediate feedback of a light turning on may have
prompted people to recycle. Feedback is most effective if it
is immediate, and immediate rewards can be a strong incentive to recycle [14, 15]. Second, gains in recycling could be
attributable to a heightened eco-consciousness. Interviewees
linked the bright green color of the display stands and the
presence of the plants to an environmental theme. Third,
gains in recycling may have resulted from a desire to help
the plants. People realized that recycling was a way to give
the plants light. Some people may have wanted to straighten
the plants with light from the opposite side. Or, they may
have realized that by recycling, as well as throwing away
trash, they could give the plant twice as much light, without
waiting for a light to turn off. Finally, gains may have resulted from deeper interpretations of the display. Most people who commented on the leaning behavior of the plants
made a successful attempt to connect this with a larger message. This message was, of course, that people throw away
more than they recycle. Realizing this, people may have been
more likely to recycle something they would have otherwise
thrown away. Although we cannot be certain this happened,
we believe that for some people our display induced a change

in awareness just at the point of throwing away a plastic
bottle. This idea is supported by quantitative and qualitative
evidence.
An increase in recycling achieved marginal statistical significance at the display featuring living plants. It may be that
the aliveness of the living plant display contributed to a
more engaging, more compelling interaction. This idea is
supported by interviews with users, who talked about caring
for the plants – giving them light, or feeling attached in
some way. The robotic plant display enjoyed a strong initial
interest that declined after 2 days. Qualities other than aliveness may explain different responses to the living and robotic plants. For example, the “leaning” behavior was not
exactly the same.
We have considered augmenting our robotic design to promote more sustained interest. One advantage of a robotic
design is that it can be precisely specified as well as precisely manipulated. Because the robotic display we created is
“infotropic,” rather than phototropic, it can be repurposed in
interesting ways. We have used it to time a presentation,
noting progress by the slow rotation of the plants. People
other than the speaker were not aware of this until we told
them, which demonstrates some value as a private display.
DE S IGN IMP LICATIO NS
Lightwe ight Robotics for Ince nting Be havior
People respond to small degrees of interactivity, and may
even enjoy lightweight interactions more than intensely focused interactions with complex robots. We need not wait
for human, animal, or even insect-like intelligence to introduce simple robotics pleasantly and effectively into everyday
environments. Artifacts made with lightweight sensors and
actuators are more robust, and can be maintained for lower
cost over longer periods of time. Our design is an example
of lightweight robotics in a public setting, using simple
sensors, processors, and actuators to deliver small yet effective rewards.
P lants as a Communicative Me dium
Plants represent a uniquely appropriate medium for communicating long-term trends. The local character and familiar
nature of plant behaviors offers additional advantages to the
designer seeking to maximize interface legibility. Although
we drew upon the natural and familiar behaviors of plants in
both our living and robotic displays, there are many possible
manipulations of plants that we did not implement in our
design. We encourage designers to explore other applications
of plants and plant forms in communicative, informative,
and interactive contexts.
Combining Living and E le ctrome chanical
Compone nts in a Hybrid Artifact
Interactions with hybrid artifacts, featuring both living and
electromechanical components, may have a more engaging
quality than interactions with purely robotic mechanisms.
The addition of living materials may introduce an emotional
quality absent from interactions with purely electromechani-

cal systems. More research is needed to test this hypothesis.
Biomimetic artifacts may also stimulate an affective response. We advocate a bidirectional perspective in the design
of hybrid systems: as roboticists explore the qualities of
robots that make them seem most alive, it seems natural to
ask how we might profitably harness the quality of aliveness
starting from biological material.
CO NCLUS IO N
The purpose of our study was to observe and describe public
reactions to our original usage of living and biomimetic
plants in interactive displays. The designs appeared to be
generating a pleasant experience overall – adding a small bit
of wonder to an otherwise mundane ritual. We observed an
increase in recycling activity with our living display and
possible increases resulting from the use of a biomimetic
display and even lights alone. These findings argue for the
development and deployment of lightweight interactive artifacts to deliver simple rewards in appropriate contexts.
Showing, through systematic field study, that our original
artifacts generated a public response was a significant step.
Characterizing the nature of those reactions was a second
step, one that paves the way for future studies in the design
spaces of hybrid and biomimetic artifacts. Our documented
designs stand as a contribution to research in the new spaces
of hybrid artifacts, biomimetic design, and lightweight robotics, which we encourage others to explore as well.
ACKNOWLE DGME NTS
This work was supported under NSF grant IIS-01215603.
Special thanks to Scott Hudson, Sara Kiesler, Jim Skees,
Rege Kostlof, Barb Kviz, and the Carnegie Mellon CPS
staff for their cooperation and support.
RE FE RE NCE S
1. Dahley, A., Wisneski, C. and Ishii, H. Water lamp and
pinwheels: Ambient projection of digital information
into architectural space. In Summary of CHI '98 (Los
Angeles, April 1998), ACM Press, 269-270.
2. Ishii, H., and Ullmer, B. Tangible Bits: Toward Seamless Interfaces between People, Bits, and Atoms. In
Proc of CHI ’97, ACM Press, New York, NY, 2000,
234-241.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

Antifakos, S., and Schiele, B. LaughingLily: Using a
flower as a real-world information display. In Proceedings of Ubicomp ‘03, 161-162.
Boehlen, M., and Mateas, M. Office Plant #1. In Leonardo Special Edition (Catalogue to the Digital Salon),
November 1998, 345-334.
Lieberman, J. CyberFlora exhibition at the CooperHewiit Museum, New York, 2003. Information available at
http://robotic.media.mit.edu/projects/cyberflora.html.
Ackroyd, H., and Harvey, D. A catalogue of these artists’ collaborative work is available at
http://www.artsadmin.co.uk/artists/ah/photosynthesistex
t.html.
Jeremijenko, N. OneTree. Exhibited at Paradise Now
Exhibition, Miller Gallery, Carnegie Mellon University,
2001. http://www.genomicart.org/jeremijenko.htm.
Pehrson, O. Yucca. Information available at
http://www.art.a.se/best_before/about/03art.html.
Goldberg, K. The Telegarden. In Ars Electronica Festival Catalog, Springer Verlag, 1996.
Hunter, M.K., and Hunter, E.H. Artificial Light. In The
Indoor Garden: Design, Construction, and Furnishing.
John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1978, 76-102.
Prather , M., Rower, A.S., and Pierre, A. Alexander
Calder, 1898-1976. Yale University Press, New Haven,
CT, 1998.
X10 Home Solutions. http://www.x10.com.
Ludwig, T.D., Gray, T.W., and Rowell, A. Increasing
recycling in academic buildings: A systematic replication. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 31, 4 (Winter 1998), 683-686.
Seligman, C., Becker, L.J., and Darley, J.M. Encouraging residential energy conservation through feedback. In
Baum, A., and Singer, J.E., Eds., Advances in Environmental Psychology, Vol. 3, Energy: Psychological
Perspectives. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1981.
Schultz, P.W., Oskamp, S., and Mainieri, T. Who recycles and when? A review of personal and situational
factors. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 15
(1995), 105-12.

