Hybrid Fabrication of Physicalizations

Lora Oehlberg

Abstract

University of Calgary

Historically, visualizations have been manually
constructed and designed by graphic designers,
facilitating some of the cognitive benefits of
constructive visualizations. Today, researchers are
investigating how digital fabrication techniques can
allow people to quickly yet expressively author
digitally-designed objects. This workshop paper
discusses an application of hybrid fabrication – systems
where a human and a computer collaborate to author a
physical artifact – to the creation of physicalizations.
We believe that hybrid fabrication of physicalizations
can offer opportunities for reflection-in-action around
datasets, while still resulting in an accurate physical
representation of data.

Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
lora.oehlberg@ucalgary.ca

Author Keywords
Physicalization; Reflection-in-Action; Fabrication.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Miscellaneous;

Introduction
Physical representations of data (or, physicalizations)
are an accessible mode of data representation that
leverages people’s multi-sensory interactions with
objects to provoke reflection on data. However,

another way that physicalizations provoke reflection on
a dataset is through participation in constructing
physicalizations[3]. People perform “reflection-inaction” [5] as they create a physical prototype of a
visualization, building deeper intuition about the data
itself.

reflection-in-action into the practice of authoring datadriven artifacts. In a hybrid system, the computational
side can handle complex datasets and produce accurate
geometry; the human, meanwhile, can be invited to
participate in authoring features at critical opportunities
for reflection-in-action around the data itself.

In practice, manually creating physicalizations still has
its weaknesses – humans are not efficient at accurately
translating abstract data into a physical representation.
As a result, Information Visualization and HumanComputer Interaction researchers have proposed tools
to facilitate the creation of Physicalization. This has led
to tools that automate (e.g., [4]) or assist (e.g., [7])
the process of generating digital designs for
physicalizations, that are then created using digital
fabrication machines. However, this automated design
tools prevent people from more actively participating in
actual constructing the physicalization.

Examples

Recently, HCI researchers have begun to explore the
grey area between manual and automated fabrication
techniques. In a hybrid fabrication system, both a
human and a machine participate in creating a physical
object. This leverages the strengths of computercontrolled fabrication (producing accurate geometry),
while the human participation introduces interpretive
flexibility or replaces the need for complex control. By
leveraging the strengths of both manual and computercontrolled fabrication, HCI researchers have created
hybrid systems that result in more creative output[2],
expressive iterative prototyping[10] and computerassistance for hand tools[1,6].
In the context of constructing physicalizations, hybrid
fabrication presents an opportunity to reintroduce

In the following section, we discuss two physicalizations
that could be created using hybrid fabrication
techniques discussed in past work.
3D Doodled Water Globe
Instead of having a 3D printer handle all object
creation, or having a human follow instructions
manually[2], a human could take turns with a machine,
manually adding to a physicalization as needed. For
example, a 3D printer could produce the bulk of a data
sculpture, while indicating where to add your own
ornamentation. This is similar to the approach where a
machine might go back to ‘repair’ or add on to an
existing plastic structure [8], except that a human is
able to communicate their intent during the ‘repair’
instead of precisely-defined and machine-executed
geometry.
For example, a geography instructor could bring a set
of small 3D printed globes into their class. Pairs of
students would receive one of these globes, a 3D
Doodler, and a projection system that could track the
position and orientation of the globe, and project
instructions on exactly where to ‘build’ data using the
3D Doodler. Using the 3D Doodler, students could add
plastic filament to the existing physicalization to
represent the amount of water usage per capita in
different countries. The 3D Doodler could also track (or

limit) how much filament it has extruded, allowing the
quantity of material to be more tightly paired with the
underlying dataset.
‘Pen Pal’ Wall
A classroom of 5th grade students in Canada has a
“sister” classroom in Japan; each student has a
corresponding ‘pen pal’ in the other country to whom
they write emails as part of a cultural exchange. The
teachers of the two classes decided to create
physicalizations in each location to represent the ‘pen
pals’ in the remote classroom. The teachers take
photographs of each student, and generate a dataset of
‘silhouettes’. Using Shaper[11], each student takes
their turn, tracing their pen pal’s shape along the wall.
Each time their pen pal sends a letter, the student can
continue to ‘edit’ the wall using augmented physical
tools[6] to create a sequence of holes that represent
the length of the letter. While the final physicalization
is relatively anonymous, the student will have
participated in creating and adding the data associated
with their pen pal. This helps them identify the
silhouette and datasets that are relevant to them in the
midst of an otherwise ambiguous physicalization.

fabrication approach. With careful interaction design,
the human should feel as though the machine is a
helpful scaffold for them to learn how to create a
physicalization[9].
Tracking Human Involvement
While the machine and the human take turns in
‘editing’ the object, the machine must continuously
tracking the human’s involvement and actions. This
allows the machine to know where and how it should
intervene in creating the physicalization. The machine
can also check the accuracy of the human’s actions
against the data itself.
Data Experiences in Fabrication
Hybrid fabrication of physicalizations offer targeted
moments for people to reflect on data, as it is being
authored in the physicalization. HCI researchers have
an opportunity to craft more interactive data
experiences that are situated in the overall task of
hybrid fabrication. For example, a system that is aware
of the human’s 3D Doodling on the Water Globe could
present more detailed information about the water
consumption in the particular region of the world where
filament is being added.

Discussion
There are several common threads present in these
examples:
Balancing Turn Taking
In the above examples, the human and the machine
take turns in creating the physicalization. However, this
interaction needs to be balanced such that the human
cognitively engages in the task. If a human views their
job as “babysitting” the machine, then a fullyautomated process would be better than a hybrid

One Machine, Multiple Humans
Hybrid Fabrication is not necessarily limited to
operation by a single human; a group of people can
participate in creating a physicalization (such as in the
‘Pen Pal’ Wall example). The machine can help
coordinate the efforts of individual people, ensure that
the group is consistent in how data is represented and
ensure the overall accuracy of the physicalization. This
results in a physicalization where each individual
participated reflection-in-action on the specific data

points that they helped construct. The act of creation
would help them recognize the data points that they
played a role in creating, while maintaining relative
anonymity for the data points that they did not
construct themselves.

About the Participant
Lora Oehlberg is an assistant professor in Computer
Science at the University of Calgary, and a member of
the Interactions Lab (iLab). Her research focuses on
technologies that support collaboration and creativity,
particularly in the context of fabrication and product
design. She completed a PostDoc at INRIA-Saclay, and
has a PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the
University of California, Berkeley. She has published in
the Human-Computer Interaction research community,
as well as at Engineering Design research venues.

References
1. Harshit Agrawal, Udayan Umapathi, Robert Kovacs,
Johannes Frohnhofen, Hsiang-Ting Chen, Stefanie
Mueller, and Patrick Baudisch. 2015. Protopiper:
Physically Sketching Room-Sized Objects at Actual
Scale. 427–436.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807505
2. Laura Devendorf and Kimiko Ryokai. 2015. Being
the Machine: Reconfiguring Agency and Control in
Hybrid Fabrication. 2477–2486.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702547
3. Samuel Huron, Sheelagh Carpendale, Alice Thudt,
Anthony Tang, and Michael Mauerer. 2014.
Constructive Visualization. In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems
(DIS ’14), 433–442.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598566

4. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian “Floyd”
Mueller. 2014. Understanding Physical Activity
Through 3D Printed Material Artifacts. In
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14),
3835–3844.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557144
5. Donald A. Schoen. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner:
How Professionals Think In Action. Basic Books.
6. Eldon Schoop, Michelle Nguyen, Daniel Lim, Valkyrie
Savage, Sean Follmer, and Björn Hartmann. 2016.
Drill Sergeant: Supporting Physical Construction
Projects Through an Ecosystem of Augmented Tools.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA ’16), 1607–1614.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892429
7. Saiganesh Swaminathan, Conglei Shi, Yvonne
Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Lora A. Oehlberg, and
Jean-Daniel Fekete. 2014. Supporting the Design
and Fabrication of Physical Visualizations. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14), 3845–
3854. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557310
8. Alexander Teibrich, Stefanie Mueller, François
Guimbretière, Robert Kovacs, Stefan Neubert, and
Patrick Baudisch. 2015. Patching Physical Objects.
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software & Technology (UIST ’15),
83–91. https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807467
9. L. S. Vygotsky. 1980. Mind in Society: The
Development of Higher Psychological Processes.
Harvard University Press.
10.
Christian Weichel, Manfred Lau, David Kim,
Nicolas Villar, and Hans W. Gellersen. 2014. MixFab:
A Mixed-reality Environment for Personal

Fabrication. In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’14), 3855–3864.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557090
11.
Shaper Origin. Retrieved May 5, 2017 from
https://shapertools.com/

