Feeling Data: Touch and Data Sense
Deborah Lupton
News & Media Research Centre
University of Canberra

This is the author’s accepted version of an article that will be published in a special
issue on Haptic Digital Media in New Media & Society. It can be cited as a post-print
version.
Introduction
People’s encounters and entanglements with the personal digital data that they
generate is a new and compelling area of research interest in this age of the
ascendancy of digital data. The emergence of novel modes of generating digital data
about humans and their activities and movements has the potential for new ways of
learning about and conceptualising bodies, selves and social relations. The experience
of everyday life in many parts of the world is now increasingly datafied – rendered into
digital data forms. People’s interactions online, their use of mobile and wearable
devices, and other ‘smart’ objects and their movements in sensor-embedded spaces all
generate multiple and constant flows of digital data, often about intensely personal
actions and preferences, social relationships, and bodily functions and movements.
They are encouraged to take the opportunity to view and reflect on this information
and use it to optimise their lives, improve their health and wellbeing, contribute to
their memories or achieve self-knowledge (Lupton, 2016a; 2017; Nafus and Sherman,
2014; Selke, 2016). In response to the continual data streams and traces generated
about them, people are learning to come to terms with how their personal information
is generated and what meanings and value it offers them. They are now called upon to
engage with a variety of forms of information about themselves and to confront the
complexities of how these data are used by others.
Responding to personal data is a highly sensory experience, involving people to
engage in complex negotiations between assessing the information they receive from
their embodied senses and that generated from digital devices. The ways in which
their personal details are translated from digital data into material form are important
to people’s sensory engagements with their data. Most discussions of personal digital
data materialisations have focused on two-dimensional visual renderings: data
1

visualisations that are primarily designed to be looked at. This article is intended as a
contribution towards understanding the sensory dimensions of personal digital data,
with a particular focus on the haptic. I explore the topic of how personal digital data
and their circulations can be made more perceptible and therefore interpretable to
people with the use of three-dimensional materialisations that invite not only viewing
but also touching and handling, and in some cases, the senses of hearing, taste and
smell as well. I argue that these forms of data materialisation are potentially integral to
new modes of understanding and incorporating personal data into everyday life, living
with and alongside these data.
The discussion is structured into several parts. In the first part, I review some of
the relevant literature on human embodiment, the senses and digital technologies,
establishing the theoretical basis that is further developed in the article. This is
followed by a discussion of how the ontologies of personal digital data may be
theorised. I then introduce the notion of data sense, drawing attention to the sensory
dimensions of how people interpret their data. I then discuss the ways in which
personal digital data can be fabricated into three-dimensional forms using 3D printing
technologies – data physicalisations – so that they can be experienced and responded
to in multisensory ways. I provide examples of objects created from personal digital
data that can be handled, displayed as decorative artefacts, worn on the body as
jewellery and even eaten. Finally, I address the politics of personal data and their
materialisations. The concluding comments raise some directions for further research
emerging from this discussion.
Human embodiment, the senses and digital technologies
My discussion here draws on sociomaterialist theoretical perspectives to conceptualise
humans’ encounters with their data as dynamic entanglements of human and
nonhuman actors. Human sensory responses are highlighted in some sociomaterial
scholarship. Sensory engagements are considered as both vital to humans’ experiences
of the world and to meaning- making, and as mediated via their encounters with other
humans and with nonhumans. Humans learn and act with and through their bodies,
including their encounters with nonhuman objects, which generate sensation and
feeling in human bodies (Paterson, 2007; Ash and Simpson, 2016; Paterson, 2009; Pink,
2015).
As the French philosopher Merleau-Ponty (1962; 1968) reminds us, we are
embodied subjects and experience the world through our bodies and our senses. Our
experiences and our judgements are always part of our ‘being-in-the-world’. For
Merleau-Ponty, ‘being-in-the-world’ is always intersubjective. Our embodiment is
always inevitably interrelational or intercorporeal. We experience the world as fleshly
bodies, via the sensations and emotions configured through and by our bodies as they
relate to other bodies and to material objects and spaces. We respond to these bodies
2

and objects with all our senses, and this is essential to human experience, social
relations and knowing our worlds. Embodiment and interembodiment are now
frequently mediated via digital technologies. Digital devices may move on or with the
human body (as in mobiles and wearables), or they may be in situ and directed at
documenting the movements of bodies (as in CCTV cameras and movement sensors
embedded in public spaces). Bodies, spaces and places are therefore simultaneously
digital-material (Pink, Sinanan, Hjorth and Horst, 2016; Pink, 2015).
Haraway’s (1995; 1985) concept of the cyborg has been seminal in emphasising
the heterogeneous and historically situated intertwinings of humans and nonhumans.
She argues that human ontologies must be understand as dynamic and emergent,
established through relational encounters, including with technologies and other
objects. In her more recent work, Haraway (2015; 2003) has developed the metaphor of
‘companion species’, which she describes as ‘post-cyborg entities’ (Haraway, 2015),
assemblages of humans and nonhumans that live alongside and co-evolve with each
other. She notes that these assemblages generate new forms of liveliness, relations and
socialities. Hayles (2012) makes similar points in her work on technogenesis, in which
she argues that humans think through, with and alongside digital media, and each
works to change each other. She describes human agency, thought and embodiment
as enmeshed in and extended through digital devices and networks. Hayles positions
digital databases as vital components of technogenesis, particularly in the ways that
knowledges are constituted and archived.
Recent scholarship in digital media studies has begun to focus on the role of
the senses and the materiality of digital technologies in people’s experiences and
practices. Some of this research has addressed the phenomenology of touch. For
example, tactile ethnographic studies by Pink and colleagues (Pink et al., 2016) and
Moores (2014) have drawn attention to the role of the haptic sensations encountered
by the hand when handling and touching digital devices, and how these sensations
contribute to ways of knowing. This research emphasises the emplaced, contingent
and emergent nature of digital technology use. It focuses on identifying the details of
how people incorporate digital devices into their mundane routines, how these
devices feel ‘right’ or ‘comfortable’ or not, the improvisations in which people may
engage when using these technologies and how these devices are part of more-thanhuman multisensory worlds.
Theorising the ontologies of personal digital data
This scholarship provides a basis for beginning to think through the ontologies of
personal digital data, and how these data are incorporated into concepts and practices
of selfhood, social relations and embodiment. Given the mobility and ubiquity of
contemporary digital devices, they may be understood as lively technologies,
3

inhabiting and accompanying us in our physical spaces and residing on or with –
and indeed, as in the case of some digital medical implants or ingestible ‘smart pills’,
sometimes in – our bodies. These devices have become companions and co-habitants
with humans (Ash, 2013; Lupton, 2016a, 2016b; Moores, 2012). So too, the digital data
that these devices generate may also be conceptualised as lively. The first element of
the vitality of digital data relates to the ways in which they are generated and what
happens thereafter. The personal digital information that is constantly generated
contributes to data assemblages that are heterogeneous and dynamic, their character
changing as more data points are added and others removed. Digital data may be
described as having their own social lives as they circulate in the digital data
economy and are purposed and repurposed (Lupton, 2016a).
Human fleshly bodies interact with digital technologies and lively data to
produce personal digital data assemblages (Lupton, 2016a). These assemblages
should be understood not simply as ‘data doubles’ (Haggerty and Ericson, 2000),
which suggests a two-dimensional shadow of an individual, but as three-dimensional
configurations. Rather than a static ‘data double’, these assemblages are constantly
changing as new forms of data are generated and incorporated. The term ‘data
double’ also suggests an individuated, autonomous materialisation of digital data
about an individual. In contrast, the digital data assemblage concept emphasises the
inextricable intertwinings of humans and their data. It also draws attention to the
material elements of the human-data configuration, such as the spaces, places,
digital devices and other objects beyond the digital that contribute to these
assemblages.
Social research has shown that people often have difficulty conceptualising
exactly what types of information are generated by or for them as part of their
engagements with digital technologies. They are also only dimly aware of what
happens to their personal data beyond their own use, and how other actors and
agencies may be using their data. Research on public understanding of personal
digital data has revealed that for most users of online technologies, the ways in
which their interactions are monitored by companies for targeting them with
customised advertising is obvious. But beyond these potential uses of their personal
data, many people have little knowledge of where their data go and who uses them.
They feel powerless about how others collect data on them and how these data are
used (Andrejevic and Burdon, 2015; Rainie and Duggan, 2016; Madden and Rainie,
2015; Kennedy and Moss, 2015; Stark, 2016; Lupton and Michael, 2017).
It is not surprising that public knowledges about the social lives of their
personal data are limited. Digital data assemblages are dynamic, responsive and
distributed forms of selfhood; because of their mutable nature, they are elusive, hard
to pin down and confront (Lupton, 2016b, 2017). Part of learning to live with our
digital data assemblages and giving them meaning is coming to terms with their
nature. We have to work hard to find figures of speech and ways of thinking to
4

encapsulate the ontology of digital data (Puschmann and Burgess, 2014). The concept
of digital data, at first glance, appears to describe a wholly immaterial phenomenon
that does not engage the senses: there seems to be nothing to look at, touch, hear,
smell or taste. Although the devices that generate, transmit and store digital data –
mobile and wearable devices, desktop and laptop computers, tablets, sensors
embedded in objects and physical spaces, servers, modems – are material objects
that are readily touchable, the data themselves are not. In most conceptualisations,
digital data are invisible and intangible, to the point that they can be used to
conduct surveillance – ‘dataveillance’ (van Dijck, 2014) – on people without their
knowledge.
An approach drawing on sociomaterialist perspectives recognises the
entanglements of personal digital data assemblages with human action. Personal
digital data assemblages are partly comprised of information about human action,
but their materialisations are also the products of human action, and these
materialisations can influence future human action. The emergence of digital
representations of phenomena have stimulated profound questions concerning
discerning the nature of the ‘real’ and the ‘virtual’, the ‘material’ and the ‘intangible’
and the role of the senses in this process.
Drawing on Haraway’s companion species concept, I have elsewhere (Lupton,
2016b) suggested that thinking of personal digital data assemblages as companion
species may be a productive way of conceptualising the ontologies of these
assemblages. Just as we might reflect on how our lively companion devices live
alongside us, we might also think about our lively personal digital data assemblages
co-habit with us. As we co-habit with our devices and our data, we co-evolve with
them. The design of the devices is conceptualised bearing in mind how users may
interact with them, and users’ habits of practice as they appropriate the devices into
their everyday lives are responses to the devices’ designs. So too, humans co-evolve
with their personal digital data assemblages. The data are configured in response to,
and about, humans’ experiences and bodies. In turn, humans may change their
modes of being and concepts of selfhood in response to their data assemblages. With
both our devices and our data, we are interembodied and intersubjective.
From data literacy to data sense
The term ‘data literacy’ has become employed in some quarters to describe how
people learn from data and also how they learn to learn from data (Frank, Walker,
Attard and Tygel, 2016; Wolff, Gooch, Montaner, Rashid and Kortuem, 2016). This
perspective has developed predominantly from literatures in informatics, education,
library services and information literacy research. Contributors to this scholarship
tend to take a cognitive-centric approach, representing learning as a disembodied
5

process. They focus on how people interpret and evaluate the validity of digitised
information and their competencies in accessing and analysing big digital datasets.
While these aspects are important, the ways in which people generate and
respond to their own digital data requires greater research attention. I use the term
‘data sense’ to encapsulate a broader meaning than data literacy. This concept brings
the body back in. It acknowledges the use of the human senses in people’s responses
to data, including their personal data as well as big datasets. It also recognises the
participation of technological sensors. Data sense, therefore, involves entanglements
of human senses and digital sensors with sense- making. This approach underlines the
embodied, affective and material nature of engaging with and learning from data
(Fors, Bäckström and Pink, 2013; Sumartojo, Pink, Lupton and LaBond, 2016); or, as
Stark (2016) puts it, the ‘visceralities of data’.
Data materialisations offer a technology for ‘freezing’ lively data assemblages at
a certain point in time and place, providing data objects that help people make sense
of their personal information (Lupton, 2017). These data objects represent a specific
digital data assemblage that existed at the time of freezing – and then goes on to
change again as more data points are generated and configured into new versions of
the assemblage and as people engage with them and incorporate them into their
everyday lives. The privileging of the visual is evident in the ways in which digital data
are typically presented. The term ‘data visualisation’ is commonly employed to refer to
the manifestations of digital data that can be configured as visual objects. It is a subfield of information visualisation. In human-computer interaction (HCI) research,
both information and data visualisation design is directed at communication:
specifically, facilitating people’s understanding of and engagement with information
(or, in HCI language, their ‘processing’ of the information). The proceedings of major
HCI conferences such as the annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI) feature many examples of this type of research.
Data visualisations involve taking pieces of information and rendering these
into visual formats, involving the mapping of this information onto a property such as
shape, colour, size and position and arranging these properties in space so that they
have a relationship to each other that is designed to convey the meaning of the
information. These formats are most often two-dimensional images: charts, maps,
graphs, infographics and other diagrams, some of which may be interactive, moving
when clicked. Those who work in ‘data viz’ endeavour to produce spectacular and
aesthetically-pleasing images that not only communicate information clearly, but do
so in a visually-arresting form.
When they are encountering visualisations of their personal data, people are
challenged with interpreting the visualisations in relation to other information about
their bodies and selves derived from their embodied sensations. It is clear from
empirical research that for many people the data visualisations generated from their
personal information is sometimes more ‘real’ to them than the knowledges that their
6

bodily sensations provide (Lupton, 2016a). Thus, for example, in research with
colleagues involving people who track their physical exercise using digital devices
(Lupton, 2017; Sumartojo, Pink, Lupton and LaBond, 2016) we found that people often
talked about trusting the ‘numbers’ that they see on the data visualisations that their
app or other software provides them. They talked about not really ‘knowing’ how their
bodies were responding the exercise until they glanced at their heart rate monitor
while running or cycling, or reviewed their data after their exercise. These data were
often viewed as more ‘truthful’ or ‘accurate’ than the haptic and other sensations they
felt from their bodies as they were exercising. Yet these self-trackers also engaged in
complex acts of data sense-making that involved drawing on their past experiences of
self-tracking their cycling trips, their sensory knowledge of how their bodies felt at the
time of the rides (whether or not they were feeling tired, injured or ill, for example)
and their sensory judgements of the weather and spatial conditions in which the trip
took place (how windy or hot it was, how much traffic and other road users there were
inhabiting the same spaces, whether the roads were slippery with rain and so on).
In these situations, people are challenged with interpreting and making
judgements how the details generated by digital sensors, including those about their
own bodily senses (how their bodies move, function, feel, recover, perform, rest and so
on), can be trusted and incorporated into their lives. Such encounters with mundane
data require people to engage in continuing negotiations with the information they
view on personal visualisations and the knowledges afforded them by their bodies.
These kinds of phenomena are rarely considered in data literacy research.
Data physicalisation and haptic sensations
While the visual materialisation of data remains a dominant concern, a counter-trend
in the HCI and design literature focuses on the other senses and how they contribute
to representations and understandings of data. Some digital devices, such as the Apple
Watch, now rely on haptic sensations (or in Apple’s parlance, ‘taptics’) to deliver
notifications to wearers, including reminding them to move if the device has sensed
that they have been sedentary for too long. On its website, Apple describe this ‘taptic’
function as serving to provide alerts intimately and ‘with a more human touch’ (Apple,
2014). Visual displays are considered to be less effective than the opportunity to tap a
wearer of the Watch on the wrist to alert them to notifications and incoming
messages.
A field of research that has emerged in HCI devotes attention to the ways in
which data can be rendered into three-dimensional physical artefacts, commonly
referred to as ‘data physicalisations’ or ‘physical visualisations’ (Jansen, Dragicevic,
Isenberg, Alexander, Karnik, Kildal, Subramanian and Hornbæk, 2015; Alexander,
Jansen, Hornbæk, Kildal and Karnik, 2015; Stusak, 2015). This research focuses on how
these data forms can support cognition, communication, learning, problem-solving
7

and decision making. The idea that multisensory experiences are richer and better
understood than those that tend to emphasise only the visual dimension is evident in
this literature. It is argued that such artefacts facilitate knowledge of data that
otherwise would not be available by using such features appealing to haptic sensations
as texture, stiffness, temperature and weight (Jansen et al., 2015; Alexander et al., 2015;
Stusak, 2015). Stusak (2015: 439), for example, refers to ‘haptic memory’, or the
recollection of data that touching or handling data physicalisations can evoke.
In the 1960s and 1970s, work began on haptic interfaces that sought to provide
tactile feedback such as vibrations or the use of motion to human users as part of the
operation of computing equipment. Some of these initiatives were directed at
rendering scientific data into three-dimensional artefacts and available to haptic
sensations. From the late 1960s, for example, Brooks et al. (Brooks Jr, Ouh-Young,
Batter and Jerome Kilpatrick, 1990) in their Project Grope worked to represent
scientific data – force fields of interacting protein molecules – as 3D materialisations.
These developments gathered pace in the 1990s. In one project, Fritz and Barner
(1999) developed a design to render mathematical data into haptic forms for people
with visual impairments, using the properties of friction and texture. The technologies
of embodied user interfaces were also developed in the 1990s, in which the user
interacts with computing technologies by direct physical manipulation. Embodied
user interfaces, involving the user manipulating the computer device directly, usually
by tilting it, rotating it or other modes of moving it, is one paradigm of embodied user
interfaces (Fishkin, Moran and Harrison, 1999).
Tangible user interfaces is another paradigm of embodied user interfaces. This
paradigm used devices that engaged haptic responses to digital data by developing
graspable objects which controlled virtual representations. Hiroshi Ishii and his
colleagues (Ishii and Ullmer, 1997) were pioneers in the field of tangible user
interfaces. They used their work on their Tangible Bits project to attempt to bring
together the world of ‘bits’ (digital information) with that of ‘atoms’ (physical objects
and architectural surfaces) and people. As demonstrated on the ‘Data Physicalization
Wiki’ (Data Physicalization, 2016), human societies have rendered information into
physical forms for millennia, including the clay tokens used by the Mesopotamians,
the quipus, or knotted ropes used by the Incas, and the Marshall Islanders’ stick charts
(many more examples are listed on this wiki). Ishii and colleagues were inspired by the
scientific instruments that had been invented in previous centuries to collect and
comprehend information. They contended that the richness of understanding the
manipulation of such physical objects developed had been lost with the contemporary
focus on two-dimensional data visualisations.
Designers and data artists have started to use materialisations of data that
invite haptic responses by rendering them into three-dimensional forms. The concept
of ‘data sculptures’ has been taken up in many design and data art projects. It is used
to describe the physicalisation of data that goes beyond the direct representation of
8

the data to incorporate aesthetic artistic qualities. This brings together information
physicalisation with tangible user interfaces and creative art making (Stusak 2015).
Thus, for example, data artist Mitchell Whitelaw used meteorological data from his
home city of Canberra, Australia, to fabricate a ‘weather bracelet’ that could be worn
on the arm. He notes on his blog post about the process that he found that people
responded with fascination to the bracelet:
The bracelet makes weather data tangible, but also invites an intimate, tactile
familiarity. People interpret the form with their fingers, recalling as they do the
wet Spring, or that cold snap after the extreme heat of February; it mediates
between memory and experience, and between public and private – weather
data becomes a sort of shared platform on which the personal is overlayed.
(Whitelaw, 2009)
Personal data physicalisations
Thus far, only a small number of designers or HCI researchers have extended the data
physicalisation idea to render personal data into objects that can be touched. One
example is a project undertaken by researchers from The Exertion Games Lab at RMIT
University. This team experimented with using 3D printers in different ways to
materialise personal body data. Their SweatAtoms project (Khot, Mueller and Hjorth,
2013; Khot, Hjorth and Mueller, 2014) involved five different material manifestations of
participants’ physical activity, fabricated on home 3D printers. These artefacts
included a 3D graph of heart rate data, a flower shape where the length and width of
the petals represent heart rate duration and intensity, a frog shape that changed in
size according to the amount of physical activity carried out that day, a die
representing the six zones of heart beat data and a ring displaying the number of
hours the person was active. Participants in this project could hold or display their
artefacts and compare the size of each one with others.
In researching user engagement with their physical data physicalisations, this
team found that viewing and handling the objects helped people gain a better sense of
their bodily data and engaged with it emotionally. They observed that the emotional
connections people had with their personal data were strengthened by being able to
handle and display these objects rather than simply viewing visualisations of the data.
Their participants enjoyed viewing and touching the objects, showing them to others
and arranging them as decorative items in their homes or on their desks at work. They
manipulated and displayed their data artefacts in various ways to get a better
understanding of their data.
Another HCI team (Stusak, Tabard, Sauka, Khot and Butz, 2014) has drawn on
the concept of data sculptures to develop ‘activity sculptures’ – 3D printed artefacts
made from physical activity data extracted from popular apps (collecting information
9

on the duration of users’ runs, distance covered, average speed and calories expended).
The artefacts included a human figure, a necklace, a lamp and a jar; each designed to
be modular so that separate pieces could be fabricated after each of the participants’
runs and formed together to make the sculpture. The participants expressed some
interesting responses to the sculptures made from their physical activity data. The
researchers noted that such factors as curiosity, playfulness and aesthetics began to
influence the ways in which the participants planned their runs, as they tried to
control the shape of the pieces that subsequently would be fabricated from their data
using the 3D printers (Stusak et al. 2014).
Some data physicalisations using personal data have sought to stimulate not
only haptic responses but also other sensory encounters as part of encouraging people
to learn more about and from their data. Design researcher Stephen Barrass employed
the technique of acoustic sonification to render personal self-tracked data into objects,
or ‘as a medium for telling stories about numbers’ (Barrass, 2014). He used his own
data from a year of blood pressure monitoring to produce a version of a Tibetan
singing bowl – or what he called the ‘Hypertension Singing Bowl’. The bowl was
fabricated from stainless steel using 3D printing. The act of rubbing the inside of the
bowl with a special stick produces a sound of a certain frequency. Barrass’s personal
bodily data were thus configured into an object that has unique visual, tactile and
aural properties. Each set of data produced a bowl that is slightly different in its
proportions and, therefore, its acoustic properties. Barrass argued that people can see
and hear this physical manifestation of their blood pressure readings and also use the
sound it makes as a reflective stimulus, helping them calm their bodies and reduce
their blood pressure accordingly. This 3D data materialisation, therefore, can act as
both a manifestation of personal data and an intervention in the type of data that the
individual may generate in the future.
In their Edipulse project (Khot, Pennings and Mueller, 2015), researchers
fabricated chocolates using 3D food printers and software files with digital data of
people’s self-tracked heart rate after physical activity. Based on each person’s data, the
3D chocolate printer made a customised chocolate in the shape of an emoticon or
words providing encouraging messages. The chocolates’ size depended on the amount
of physical activity in which the participants had engaged. They therefore acted as
rewards that could be eaten by the participants. These participants could not only
view and touch their data, they could taste and smell them as well.
The politics of personal data materialisations
I have focused thus far on the potential for data physicalisations to help people engage
in sense-making in response to their personal digital data. They offer ways of bringing
into data sense new versions of the possibilities of these data. Beyond this use lies a
further opportunity for such phenomena to uncover the social and political
10

dimensions of personal data practices and cultures. Personal data materialisations,
whatever form and shape they take on, are inevitably very limited representations of
bodies and selves. The tools used to generate data materialisations work to single out
some aspects of information over others. The role played by design and concepts of
aesthetics and indeed, choices about what phenomena are considered to be
‘information’ are all central to the versions of their data that are delivered to people for
their review; and by extension, what counts as knowledge and how people should
learn from these visualisations.
A body of literature has begun to develop from scholars who take critical
approaches to digital data visualisation. Writers who have contributed to this
literature have insisted on approaching data visualisations as politically-charged
phenomena that are the product of and serve to reproduce tacit assumptions,
knowledges and power relations. They contend that data visualisation is a form of
ideological knowledge production, in which certain elements are chosen to be
manipulated in specific ways to create and emphasise relationships while others are
ignored or under-emphasised. Powerful interests and existing biases and
discrimination are frequently reproduced as part of the decisions made in creating
data visualisations (Gregg, 2015; McCosker and Wilken, 2014; Kennedy, Hill, Allen and
Aiello, 2016; Kennedy and Hill, 2016; Adema and Hall, 2016). These materialisations,
indeed, can be considered data ‘performances’, not only conveying but creating
meaning (Adema and Hall, 2016).
The persuasive power of these visually-compelling images often overwhelms
such critical analysis. Such visualisations often tend to be accepted as politically
neutral and value-free (D'Ignazio, 2015; Hill, Kennedy and Gerrard, 2016). Little
attention is paid to where the information that is represented in such aestheticallypleasing images comes from, who collects it, how accurate it is and whose interests it
serves. The decisions made about what data are included and which are not, and
indeed, what features even count as data, for example, are elided in most data
visualisations. Like other popular culture artefacts, data visualisations can work to
stigmatise, marginalise and trivialise disempowered social groups. Some of the most
interesting work related to data visualisations has come from feminist critics of
geographic information systems. They have challenged the positivist scientific
practices and assumptions of this method of mapping and called for alternative
practices that highlight injustices and inequalities, such as ‘counter mapping’, or
generating cartographic representations that challenge taken-for-granted assumptions
and highlight aspects that previously were not visible (for example, Kwan, 2002;
Elwood, 2008; Pavlovskaya, 2006).
In some cases, such counter mapping involves the use of material other than
two-dimensional visual images. For example, feminist geographer Mei-Po Kwan (2002)
has used 3D digital mapping technologies to generate what she describes as ‘body
maps’ of women, portraying their movements as life paths in three-dimensional space
11

and comparing these maps with those of women of different socioeconomic status and
ethnicity. Other feminist geographers have employed qualitative rather than
quantitative data in geographic information systems by adding voices and other
sounds, hand-drawn images, photographs and videos, seeking to display and
emphasise the richness of information that lies outside numerical data (Pavlovskaya
2006).
Just as visual representations are enactments of tacit assumptions and
embedded power relations, any mode of sensory knowledge, including the haptic, is
shaped via social, cultural and political processes. There are several levels of mediation
and remediation operating when embodied sensations are rendered into digital data.
The sensation of touch, as well as other sensory responses, is mediated through the
flesh, skin, nerves and receptors of the human body. Physical interactions with
technologies extend and reconfigure these mediations (Paterson, 2009). Material
dimensions of human embodiment and practice are mediated via their interactions
with digital technologies and transfigured into digital forms of information that can be
transmitted to computing archives. These digitised forms of information can then be
remediated into digital displays and in some cases, combined and recombined with
other datasets to generate new data materialisations. Personal data materialisations,
once delivered back to the people who generated them, can then be used to change
their practices and attitudes in some ways. They can therefore have material effects on
people’s lives, which in turn can generate new data assemblages, and so on. The data
they materialise, and the materialisations themselves, will always be limited and
reductive, identifying only some elements of embodied sensations and practices.
Applying this critical perspective to data materialisations involves examining
the interpretation of individuals’ personal data and recognising ways these may be
used for their own ends as well as promoting their awareness of what happens to these
data beyond the individual. This may include developing an understanding of the
sociocultural dimensions of data materialisations themselves. Intensifying the visceral
properties of digital information can also serve to provoke people into responding
more intensely to issues concerning what happens to their personal digital data. The
emotional responses that data physicalisations can evoke may lead people to engage
more actively, including at the political level, in challenges to violations of their
personal data privacy and security (Stark, 2016).
Some artists have employed 3D printing technologies as part of their critique of
the ways in which personal data can be used for surveillance purposes. In her art work
‘Stranger Visions’ (2016), Heather Dewey-Hagborg takes digital genetic data files, turns
them into phenotypes (the physical manifestations of genomic data) and then prints
out data sculptures of human heads based on the genetic data. She uses cast-off
objects that she finds in public places to derive the DNA traces she uses: masticated
chewing gum wads, fallen strands of hair, cigarette butts or finger nail clippings. Her
point is to emphasise the extent and range of the detailed information that can now be
12

collected about people, right down to their genetic profiles, and the inferences that
can be made about them using these details. This work is designed to be a reminder to
people of how their bodily traces can be datafied and used for the purposes of others,
possibly revealing their identities or other sensitive information in the process.
Such projects suggest the potential of using multisensory data physicalisations
not only to help people interpret their personal data but to consider their political
implications. Several HCI projects seek to use 3D-printing technologies as a method of
inviting members of the public to engage in the act of creating their data objects. The
idea of such work is to encourage reflection and conversations about the information
and help people feel as if they have more control of and engagement with their
personal data by allowing them to make their own artefacts. It is argued that if these
acts of fabrication take place in a communal setting, they may become less
individualised, resulting in shared and social experiences of generating personal data
physicalisations.
Thus, for example, Nissen and Bowers (2015) have experimented with
encouraging people to engage in ‘data making by producing ‘data-things’ from their
own data. These physical data representations become personal data artefacts. Nissen
and Bowers refer to such activities as ‘participatory data translation’. Such digital data
physicalisations, they argue, are experienced as less ‘alien’ than mass-produced things
because their makers have better knowledge of how they are fabricated and they have
a far more personal provenance. One example of these data-things is the objects that
were created from the tweets generated by attendees at a conference. The number of
tweets using the conference hashtag created by each attendee over a period of 24
hours was fabricated into an object that could be worn as a broach representing the
extent of that person’s Twitter engagement. The researchers argue that through
engaging in this process of data translation, participants can gain a sense of the
reconfigurations that data undergo; or, as I would put it, the liveliness of the data
becomes more visible.
Concluding comments
In this article, I have brought together some different literatures to explore the ways in
which personal digital data are materialised and interpreted. I have developed the
concept of data sense as a way of thinking through the intersections and
entanglements of human bodies, software code, digital devices, space and place and
the digital data that are generated from these entanglements. Three-dimensional
personal data materialisations invite users to ‘feel their data’. ‘Feeling data’ has two
meanings: the sensations of touching these three-dimensional objects and the visceral
responses that are generated from these and other sensory encounters with data. This
acknowledges that humans, digital technologies and digital data participate and work
together in feeling in complex ways.
13

As I have argued, the negotiations in which people engage when feeling their
data implications for personal digital data meanings and practices and for data sense.
Apart from some of the HCI research cited above concerning user experiences, we as
yet know little about the sensory dimensions of how people interact with their
personal data materialisations (whether two-dimensional or three-dimensional).
While these objects are static forms of data, they are also potentially lively – they may
incite or provoke further embodied and sensory responses. Further research into these
engagements would go far to provide insights into data sense, including a focus on
how people collect and engage with their data as part of the sensory routines of
everyday life.
A sociomaterialist approach to the body focuses on how bodily assemblages
possess certain forms of new capacities and power to act by asking ‘What can a body
do?’ (Fox, 2015). This type of critique raises some compelling issues for further practice
and scholarship related to three - dimensional and other multisensory materialisations
of personal data. We might not only ask ‘What can a body do?’, but also ‘What can
digital data assemblages (which include bodies) do?’ We might also investigate what
the ‘felt phenomenologies’ (Paterson, 2007) of these assemblages are: how do people
incorporate them into their everyday lives and what are the sensory dimensions of this
incorporation? In Merleau-Ponty’s terminology, how are data physicalisations and the
haptic and other sensations they incite part of ‘being the world’ experiences? In what
ways do the senses work together – or work against each other – when people are
engaging in sense-making in response to their digital data assemblages?
Drawing on the notion of ‘mundane frictions’ articulated by Fors (2015) these
forms of haptic media might begin to raise important questions about where fit
become uncomfortable, unsettling or disturbing – where and how they do not ‘feel
right’. As Frosh and Becker observe, the presence of friction does not need to imply
conflict or hindrance. Rather, it can be viewed as a productive and positive mode of
generation of knowledge, identifying dissonances that are central to critique. The
visceralities that data physicalisations can offer evoke these types of discomforts, and
in doing so, potentially awaken people to where digital data may not work, fail to fit,
lose their seamless nature and create friction. Discomfort and disquiet can become
more than personal affects – they can provoke political responses. We can, perhaps,
begin to think about a type of haptic politics that may be enacted via data
physicalisations and data visceralisations, where data simply do not make sense
because they do not ‘feel right’.
Returning to the political possibilities of data visceralisation, going beyond
simply seeking to create sensually- engaging objects in the cause of challenging
entrenched assumptions and interests can be a way to engage with these issues.
Approaches that adopt a perspective leading to responses to personal data which
invite users to take up ludic, creative and improvised engagements (Gaver, Bowers,
Boehner, Boucher, Cameron, Hauenstein, Jarvis and Pennington, 2013), create their
14

own data-things (Nissen and Bowers, 2015), encourage them to invest objects with
even more personal and intimate features by overlaying a patina of personal data on
them (Lee, Son and Nam, 2016) or demonstrate to them the vulnerability of their data,
as in Hewey-Dagborg’s art work, may be one way forward. These approaches provide
possibilities for the generation of alternative or counter perspectives and greater
opportunities for people to ‘feel’ their data in ways which make sense in the context of
their own lives. In the process, they may well develop data sense in the tripartite
meaning that I have introduced here. This acknowledges the entanglements of digital
sensors, human senses and human sense-making as well as the political and
ideological implications of data and their materialisations.
References
Adema J and Hall G. (2016) Posthumanities: the dark side of 'the dark side of the
digital'. The Journal of Electronic Publishing, 19.
http://quod.lib.umich.edu/j/jep/3336451.0019.201?view=text;rgn=main accessed 11
January 2017.
Alexander J, Jansen Y, Hornbæk K, Kildal J and Karnik A. (2015) Exploring the
challenges of making data physical. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). Toronto: ACM
Press, 2417-2420.
Andrejevic M and Burdon M. (2015) Defining the sensor society. Television & New
Media 16: 19-36.
Apple. (2014) Watch technology. Available at:
https://www.apple.com/watch/technology/.
Ash J. (2013) Rethinking affective atmospheres: Technology, perturbation and space
times of the non-human. Geoforum 49: 20-28.
Ash J and Simpson P. (2016) Geography and post-phenomenology. Progress in Human
Geography 40: 48-66.
Barrass S. (2014) Acoustic sonification of blood pressure in the form of a singing bowl.
Paper presented at Conference on Sonification of Health and Environmental Data.
York, UK.
Brooks Jr FP, Ouh-Young M, Batter JJ and Jerome Kilpatrick P. (1990) Project GROPE:
haptic displays for scientific visualization. Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference
on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH '90). Dallas: ACM Press,
177-185.
D'Ignazio C. (2015) What would feminist data visualization look like? MIT Center for
Civic Media. https://civic.mit.edu/feminist-data-visualization accessed 26 January
2016.
15

Data Physicalization. (2016) Data Physicalization Wiki. Available at:
http://dataphys.org/.
Dewey Hagborg H. (2016) Stranger Visions. Available at:
http://deweyhagborg.com/projects/stranger-visions.
Elwood S. (2008) Volunteered geographic information: future research directions
motivated by critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal 72: 173-183.
Fishkin KP, Moran TP and Harrison BL. (1999) Embodied user interfaces: Towards
invisible user interfaces. Engineering for Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 1-18.
Fors V. (2015) Sensory experiences of digital photo-sharing - ‘mundane frictions' and
emerging learning strategies. Journal of Aesthetics & Culture, 7.
http://www.aestheticsandculture.net/index.php/jac/article/view/30655 accessed 1 May
2016.
Fors V, Bäckström Å and Pink S. (2013) Multisensory emplaced learning: resituating
situated learning in a moving world. Mind, Culture, and Activity 20: 170-183.
Fox NJ. (2015) Personal health technologies, micropolitics and resistance: a new
materialist analysis. Health: online first.
Frank M, Walker J, Attard J and Tygel A. (2016) Data literacy - what is it and how can
we make it happen? The Journal of Community Informatics. http://www.cijournal.net/index.php/ciej/article/view/1347 accessed 1 December 2016.
Fritz JP and Barner KE. (1999) Design of a haptic data visualization system for people
with visual impairments. Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 7: 372-384.
Gaver WW, Bowers J, Boehner K, Boucher A, Cameron DWT, Hauenstein M, Jarvis N
and Pennington S. (2013) Indoor weather stations: investigating a ludic approach to
environmental HCI through batch prototyping. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). Paris: ACM Press, 3451-3460.
Gregg M. (2015) Inside the data spectacle. Television & New Media 16: 37-51.
Haggerty K and Ericson R. (2000) The surveillant assemblage. British Journal of
Sociology 51: 605-622.
Haraway D. (1985) Manifesto for cyborgs: science, technology, and socialist feminism
in the 1980s. Socialist Review 80: 65-108.
Haraway D. (1995) Foreword: Cyborgs and symbionts: living together in the new world
order. In: Gray CH (ed) The Cyborg Handbook. New York: Routledge, xi-xx.
Haraway D. (2003) The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant
Otherness, Chicago: Prickly Paradigm.
Haraway D. (2015) Birth of the kennel: a lecture by Donna Haraway, August 2000. The
European Graduate School. http://www.egs.edu/faculty/donna-haraway/articles/birthof-the-kennel/ accessed 26 May 2015.
Hayles NK. (2012) How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis,
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hill RL, Kennedy H and Gerrard Y. (2016) Visualizing junk: big data visualizations and
the need for feminist data studies. Journal of Communication Inquiry 40: 331-350.
16

Ishii H and Ullmer B. (1997) Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces between
people, bits and atoms. Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '97). Atlanta: ACM Press, 234-241.
Jansen Y, Dragicevic P, Isenberg P, Alexander J, Karnik A, Kildal J, Subramanian S and
Hornbæk K. (2015) Opportunities and challenges for data physicalization. Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). Seoul:
ACM Press, 3227-3236.
Kennedy H and Hill RL. (2016) The pleasure and pain of visualizing data in times of
data power. Television & New Media online ahead of print.
Kennedy H, Hill RL, Allen W and Aiello G. (2016) The work that visualisation
conventions do. Information, Communication & Society 19: 715-735.
Kennedy H and Moss G. (2015) Known or knowing publics? Social media data mining
and the question of public agency. Big Data & Society, 2.
http://bds.sagepub.com/content/2/2/2053951715611145.abstract accessed 10 December
2015.
Khot R, Hjorth L and Mueller FF. (2014) Understanding physical activity through 3D
printed material artifacts. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI '14). Toronto: ACM Press, 3835-3844.
Khot R, Mueller F and Hjorth L. (2013) SweatAtoms: materializing physical activity.
Proceedings of the 9th Australasian Conference on Interactive Entertainment: Matters
of Life and Death. Melbourne: ACM Press, 1-7.
Khot RA, Pennings R and Mueller FF. (2015) EdiPulse: supporting physical activity
with chocolate printed messages. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). Seoul: ACM Press, 1391-1396.
Kwan M-P. (2002) Feminist visualization: re-envisioning GIS as a method in feminist
geographic research. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92: 645-661.
Lee M-H, Son O and Nam T - J. (2016) Patina-inspired personalization: personalizing
products with traces of daily use. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems (DIS '16). Brisbane: ACM Press, 251-263.
Lupton D. (2016b) The Quantified Self: A Sociology of Self-Tracking, Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Lupton D. (2016) Digital companion species and eating data: Implications for
theorising digital data–human assemblages. Big Data & Society, 3.
http://bds.sagepub.com/spbds/3/1/2053951715619947.full.pdf accessed 7 January 2016.
Lupton D. (2017) Personal data practices in the age of lively data. In: Daniels J, Gregory
K and McMillan Cottom T (eds) Digital Sociologies. Bristol: Policy Press, 335-350.
Lupton D and Michael M. (2017) 'Depends on who's got the data': public
understandings of personal digital dataveillance. Surveillance & Society, in press.
Madden M and Rainie L. (2015) Americans' Attitudes about Privacy, Security and
Surveillance. <http://www.pewinternet.org/files/2015/05/Privacy-and-SecurityAttitudes-5.19.15_FINAL.pdf> accessed 21 May 2015.
17

McCosker A and Wilken R. (2014) Rethinking ‘big data’ as visual knowledge: the
sublime and the diagrammatic in data visualisation. Visual Studies 29: 155-164.
Merleau-Ponty M. (1962) Phenomenology of Perception, London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Merleau-Ponty M. (1968) The Visible and the Invisible, Evanston, IL: Nortwestern
University Press.
Moores S. (2012) Media, Place and Mobility, Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Moores S. (2014) Digital orientations:“Ways of the hand” and practical knowing in
media uses and other manual activities. Mobile Media & Communication 2: 196-208.
Nafus D and Sherman J. (2014) This one does not go up to 11: the Quantified Self
movement as an alternative big data practice. International Journal of Communication
8: 1785 - 1794.
Nissen B and Bowers J. (2015) Data-Things: digital fabrication situated within
participatory data translation activities. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). Seoul: ACM Press,
2467-2476.
Paterson M. (2007) The Senses of Touch: Haptics, Affects and Technologies, Oxford:
Berg.
Paterson M. (2009) Introduction: re-mediating touch. The Senses and Society 4: 129140.
Pavlovskaya M. (2006) Theorizing with GIS: a tool for critical geographies?
Environment and Planning A 38: 2003-2020.
Pink S. (2015) Approaching media through the senses: between experience and
representation. Media International Australia 154: 5-14.
Pink S, Sinanan J, Hjorth L and Horst H. (2016) Tactile digital ethnography:
Researching mobile media through the hand. Mobile Media & Communication 4: 237251.
Puschmann C and Burgess J. (2014) Metaphors of big data. International Journal of
Communication 8: 20. http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/2169 accessed 12
December 2015.
Rainie L and Duggan M. (2016) Privacy and Information Sharing.
http://www.pewinternet.org/files/2016/01/PI_2016.01.14_Privacy-and-InfoSharing_FINAL.pdf accessed 30 January 2016.
Selke S. (ed) (2016) Lifelogging: Digital Self-tracking and Lifelogging - Between
Disruptive Technology and Cultural Transformation. Wiesbaden: Springer VS.
Stark L. (2016) The emotional context of information privacy. The Information Society
32: 14-27.
Stusak S. (2015) Exploring the potential of physical visualizations. Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI
'15). Stanford, CA: ACM Press, 437-440.
18

Stusak S, Tabard A, Sauka F, Khot RA and Butz A. (2014) Activity sculptures: exploring
the impact of physical visualizations on running activity. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 20: 2201-2210.
Sumartojo S, Pink S, Lupton D and LaBond CH. (2016) The affective intensities of
datafied space. Emotion, Space and Society 21: 33-40.
van Dijck J. (2014) Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: Big Data between scientific
paradigm and ideology. Surveillance & Society 12: 197-208.
Whitelaw M. (2009) Weather bracelet - 3D printed data-jewelry. (The Teeming Void).
http://teemingvoid.blogspot.com.au/2009/10/weather-bracelet-3d-printed-data.html
accessed 3 May 2016.
Wolff A, Gooch D, Montaner JJC, Rashid U and Kortuem G. (2016) Creating an
understanding of data literacy for a data-driven society. The Journal of Community
Informatics. http://www.ci-journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/view/1286 accessed 1
December 2016.

19

