Data-Things: Digital Fabrication Situated within
Participatory Data Translation Activities
Bettina Nissen
John Bowers
Culture Lab, School of Arts and Cultures, Newcastle University, UK
b.s.nissen@ncl.ac.uk
john.bowers@ncl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT

This paper explores a design-led approach to digital
fabrication which situates it in participatory data translation
activities to demonstrate that this technology can find
application beyond its use as tool for manufacture. We
present two contrasting design contexts in which,
respectively, data from conference twitter conversations
and craft practitioners’ movements are translated into
interactively generated and fabricated physical artefacts.
We argue that direct involvement in such digital fabrication
activities can help people invest meaning into artefacts and
facilitate social interaction and reflection upon their
activities, while encouraging practitioners to incorporate
new forms into their own work. On this basis, we
reconsider digital fabrication within data translation
activities as situated along an extended ‘trajectory of use’ in
which reflective, meaningful ‘data-things’ can be created.
Author Keywords

Digital fabrication; 3D printing; research through design;
data materialisation; data translation; making; craft
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

Digital fabrication is a widely researched topic in the HCI
community with areas focusing on FabLabs [2, 18], DIY
maker culture [9, 23], personal fabrication in the home [6,
13] and as interactive tools [15, 25]. More recently,
research has also started to explore more varied
perspectives on the role of digital fabrication in HCI [14].
Notably, a research area has opened out exploring the
possibilities and values of digital fabrication situated within
interactive making activities in different settings.
For example, Ogawa et al. [17] have studied what they call
Social Fabrication, a shared experience of digital
fabrication. They suggest two essential elements for
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2015, April 18 - 23, 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea Copyright is
held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM
978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702245

realising it, (a) the “setting of a proper frame and topic and
motivation” and (b) “a way to illustrate both individual and
collective perspectives” [17, p.58]. Relatedly, Nissen et al.
[16] studied a shared souvenir making activity where digital
fabrication technologies were used to make a variety of
artefacts representing individual and collective views on an
art exhibition. The shared fabrication activity facilitated
conversation and reflection concerning the exhibition and
engendered curiosity in the fabrication technologies
themselves. This work points to the value of embedding
digital fabrication into a visitor’s trajectory through the
exhibition as not just a means for the making of souvenirs
but for enriching the whole experience of the visit.
In contrast to these public settings, a domestic context is
studied by Khot et al. with their SweatAtoms [8] – a system
for situated digital fabrication in people’s homes, allowing
them to personally generate “material representations” [8,
p.3835] of different aspects of their physical activity. With
their more personal approach to fabrication and physical
data representations the authors suggest that there is an
opportunity for design researchers “to print things from
data” [8, p.3843] to incorporate digital fabrication in their
HCI design and research practices. This area of context
specific, situated digital fabrication opens up a new design
space to investigate digital fabrication situated in other
contexts and experiences that have not yet been explored.
The current paper extends this emerging concern to study
digital fabrication as a process embedded within social
activities. While it is valuable to gain practical insight into
the applicability and utility of digital fabrication
technologies across many different contexts, Nissen et al.
make a more radical argument for embedding fabrication
within shared activities. By making fabrication a shared
process, it is possible for participants to invest meaning in
artefacts which they might not do if confronted with
something mass-produced. It is not just that the artefact can
be personally tailored. Participating in making creates a
richer view on the skills and know-how involved in making,
the technologies used, their rationales and any research
issues surrounding them, as well as providing an occasion
for conversation and reflection on the context in which the
making is done. Following Ingold [7], Nissen et al. argue
that artefacts made this way take on the character of
‘things’ connected to their circumstances of making, rather
than alien ‘objects’ created by mysterious processes. While
it has long been a value expressed by those who practice

participatory design (see Ehn’s classic formulation in [3]) it
is only recently that researchers [16, 17] have pointed to the
value of participation in digital fabrication.
We wish to further this concern for making digital
fabrication a visible, accountable process potentially open
to participation. In particular, we wish to explore settings
which foreground the translation, into digitally fabricated
form, of data of personal significance. It is a commonplace
observation that much contemporary everyday activity
yields data which can be captured and analysed, whether
these data be the content of social media postings or the
measurements given by a personal health monitor.
Increasingly, we hear of the so-called ‘quantified self’ [19]
or ‘personal informatics’ [12] to encapsulate this
phenomenon. The critical examination of this trend and
topics such as what we mean by the very idea of data lie
beyond the current paper. Instead, we wish to see how our
interest in shared fabrication processes can open out new
possibilities for the experience of personally relevant data –
data relevant to an activity or skill which is currently
engaging the participants.
In this paper, we present two cases where we have created
participatory fabrication activities so as to explore how they
impact differentially on our design concerns and research
interests. They contrast in various ways, deliberately, so
that we can begin to investigate the broad application and
implications of our approach. In one, we situate digital
fabrication within a public setting, a conference. In the
other, we study a craft which is typically practiced in
intimate, domestic settings, crochet. At the conference, we
conducted a short-term study with many participants, while
our work with craft practitioners is a much more extended
relationship with a few. At the conference, we worked ‘in
the wild’ in the broader conference setting which did not
principally concern digital fabrication, while the craft
practitioners’ engagement with us was much more focused,
driven in part by a mutual interest in craft skills. At the
conference, we experimented with translations based on
data sources which are already public, while with the craft
practitioners we used techniques to elicit data related to the
execution of their craft. While these studies differ in terms
of setting, time-frame, scale, focus, mutual interest and data
provenance, we have approached both with a concern to
make our digital fabrication practices open and accountable
so as to explore the meanings people invest, discover or
create in things and data. We conclude this paper with a
comparative account of these contrasting contexts,
especially noting where we have been less successful, to
help us develop some concepts which might guide future
investigations in the HCI community of data translation
within participatory fabrication activities.
CONFERENCE TWEET TRANSLATIONS
Context and Study

This first case study took place at a national conference
about future digital technologies called Thinking Digital.

The event encouraged us to situate a digital fabrication
activity within its programme. The attendees are a small but
very involved community which every year engages with
one another and the organisers who are an integral part of
this community. In particular, discussions and
conversations are broadcast via Twitter through an often
trending hashtag #tdc14. After investigating twitter data
from the previous year’s conference, we decided to explore
how online social interactions could be translated into
physical forms to engage attendees in offline conversations.
For this purpose we developed an algorithmic design
system that would translate overall conference and
individual tweets into wearable artefacts that might
resource attendees’ interactions with one another. In order
to be suitably engaging for the technology savvy audience,
we decided to use a 3D printer. These decisions guided our
design as we needed to take into account constraints such as
fabrication duration and transportability [cf. 16]. After
initial explorations of different techniques for tweet data
translation, we decided on a wearable ‘clip’ shape. This
depicted the timeline of tweet behavior over the course of
24 hours. The number of tweets per hour was computed and
‘graphed’ as a pair of ‘ridges’, for all conference tweets
(bottom) and the individual’s (middle). For example, the
shape in Fig.1a shows the tweet activity of the 24 hours
prior to midday of the second conference day. The
collective tweets (bottom) with the most current amount of
tweets on the left and going back in time towards the right.
A spike of tweets can be seen in the morning session with
minimal amounts of tweets during the night falling off after
the previous evening’s activity. In comparison, this
individual’s tweets (middle) show their tweet behaviour
aligning with the evening and morning activity but showing
more individual activity during the night. Using the Twitter
API, we collected all hashtagged tweets throughout the
conference in real time using a custom script in Processing
(www.processing.org) which algorithmically generated 3D
models (Fig.1b) when a Twitter handle was entered.

Figure 1 (a) Fabricated physical shapes (b) digitally generated

At the start of the conference, we introduced the project onstage to encourage attendees to visit our fabrication stand in
the hall of the conference venue (Fig. 2). We wished to
make shape generation and fabrication as transparent as
possible. However, it was clear that attendees would have
limited time to engage with these activities. We therefore
focused on keeping the process fairly simple for

participants. Upon entering their Twitter handle, their shape
was digitally generated on screen and discussed before
being printed on the 3D Printer. Participants were invited to
watch and engage with the printing process for their shape
or optionally return to collect it later.

tweeted about the conference which was a prerequisite for
any shape to be created. He then went back to the
conference, tweeted more, and returned to create his shape.
In these cases the digitally printed artefact encouraged
reflection and certain behavior changes.

Figure 3: Uses of tweet translations

Figure 2: Fabrication stand with Makerbot and software
Observations

Over the course of the two-day conference, 24 people
participated from diverse backgrounds – from computer
programmers and business people to creative workers and
cultural organisation representatives. We recorded each
participant’s engagement with the fabrication activity
alongside informal conversations with attendees and
participants. We took field notes and other forms of ad hoc
observation. Overall the idea of generating a personalised
shape from one’s tweets was positively received with a
surprisingly large amount of interest by the attendees, both
online (via hashtag) and offline (attendee visits). Unpacking
this general positive reaction, we analyse a number of
features of interest.

Another attendee who received her shape later at the
closing party was very excited about her artefact and
tweeted: “3D printed Twitter badge selfie!! Thanks
@bettinanissen
#eyespoppingoutofheadwithexcitement”
(Fig. 4a). Apart from the enthusiasm for the personalised
shapes, we have hints that the artefacts might also have
longer-term value. Receiving additional tweets after the
event thanking us for the shapes and experience suggests
the value of the personal artefact post-event, e.g. one
example included a picture of the shape attached to the
company’s business logo (Fig. 4b): “Our awesome (and
unique) 3d printed clip is now installed on our
documentation. Thanks @bettinanissen”.

Use, Value and Behaviour

When their shapes were generated and fabricated, the
majority of participants were very enthusiastic about their
shape, with one of the participant spontaneously hugging
one of the researchers in excitement. With only four
participants not returning for their shapes, the overall
response was positive. The participants were predominantly
eager to generate their shapes and equally interested in the
3D printing process. We found several ways the artefacts
were worn throughout the conference, most commonly on
conference badges, straps, jackets or shirts (see Fig.3).
Interestingly, a couple of participants altered their tweet
behaviour to explore how this would effect their shape. One
attendee who was not happy with his initial digital shape
when it was previewed on-screen came back after having
tweeted more to see if his shape expressed his engagement
with the conference better before printing it out. Another
attendee was very keen to have his shape printed but when
generating a shape it visibly transpired that he hadn’t

Figure 4: Translations (a) in a selfie and (b) on a business logo
Initiating Conversation

Throughout the later part of the conference and especially
at the conference dinner we observed several people
comparing their shapes with one another, for example while
waiting for food or coffee. Such uses of the shape are many
and varied. One attendee stated “I’m not very good at
talking to people at conferences if I don’t know anyone but
this [shape] gave me something to talk to people about and
start a conversation.” Other conversations involve people
comparing their shapes and reasoning about differences
and, through this, potentially making new contacts.
When we asked two attendees who were comparing their
shapes (Fig. 5a) what they were looking to discover, they
humorously replied that they were trying to find out if they
are “tweet soulmates” with their tweeting habits becoming
aligned over the course of the conference.

Reflection and Imagination

Beyond the artefacts starting conversations amongst
attendees, they also encouraged people to interpret their
shape in their own way and reflect upon their activities at
the conference and how they had been translated into
physical form. One participant, when asked if people talked
to him about his shape, replied that “everyone did and
wanted to know what it is”. He then went into a fairly
detailed description of how he explained it to people
interpreting the shape as his “embodied tweets about
technology, innovation, beer and cake” while jokingly
pointing at different spikes of his tweet translation with
cake being the biggest spike “because he loves cake”.

However, being situated within a fairly tightly scheduled
conference program, the forms of participation we could
develop were limited. Our algorithmic fabrication
technique, while it still encouraged people to dwell and
engage, was mindful of the need for rapid response during
break times so that a number of people would get the
chance to participate. This did not allow us to explore how
people might engage with and invest meaning into digitally
fabricated artefacts when their involvement with making is
more prolonged. To discuss the relationship between data,
physical artefact and fabrication in more depth, we initiated
a much longer-term study..
CRAFT MOVEMENT TRANSLATIONS
Context and Study

For this study, we worked with a small group of 4-6 local
crochet practitioners with varied skill levels (beginner,
intermediate, professional) over a longer period of time.
This gave us the opportunity to take a more iterative and
dialogical approach to design exploration than in the
previous case study. We could explore different ways of
engaging the participants with their data and develop
different data translations and activities.
Figure 5 (a) Comparison of translations and (b) showing fangs

Initial Workshop

The shapes often elicited imaginative associations from
participants, particularly when they first encountered them:
for example “it looks like a cathedral” or it resembled teeth
or fangs, which was acted out by the participant playfully
(Fig. 5b). One participant described the artefact as “unique
fingerprint” comparing it to personalised tangible
encryption keys. In all these ways, the tweet translation was
a resource for varied responses from reflection on people’s
behavior to imaginative responses to the shape and
possibilities for its use. While the generated shapes needed
initial explanation of their relation to tweet data, they
allowed participants to tell their own stories to give them
meaning. As one participant emphasised: “It’s good that it’s
abstract so you can make up your own interpretation”.

In an initial workshop we encouraged the participants to
discuss their experiences and thoughts about their practice
while encouraging them to simply crochet the way they
usually would during their weekly meet-ups (Fig. 6a). The
main topics of the conversations were the importance of the
crochet hook, its shape, size and the materials it is made of,
the difficulty in understanding the ‘flow’ or tension of the
wool and reasons for their preference of crochet over other
crafts such as knitting, describing crochet as easy to learn,
addictive, productive, meditative, colourful, creative,
sculptural and giving a sense of achievement.

Limitations and Challenges

Although digital fabrication has been extensively explored
in HCI research, several of the tech-savvy conference
attendees had not seen a 3D printer in action. This made it
difficult to differentiate participants’ experiences of the data
translation activity from the novelty effect of the
technology. However, we believe both aspects add value to
the overall making experience. This was confirmed by
participants who were acquainted with digital fabrication
technology and still interested in the personal tweet
translations, the processes of making them as well as the
artefacts themselves. For other participants, the broader
implications of our work were a key to their appreciation.
One attendee tweeted “Love crossover from virtual to
craft.” showing how seemingly separated digital content
and physical making could be integrated through a
participatory data translation activity in a craft-like way.

Figure 6: (a) The workshop setting and (b) the sensor hook

While the participants shared their experience and thoughts
about their practice with us, we additionally captured some
initial data from their movements through a sensor attached
to the back of a crochet hook (Fig. 6b). To make this
process as noninvasive as possible, we used a small
wireless movement sensor, WAX9 (www.axivity.com), to
record accelerometer and gyroscope data in real-time while
the participants were crocheting. We initially asked them to
each crochet a basic pattern in order to capture comparable
data that we could then explore for potential data
translations.

Data Translation Workshops

For the next workshop, we chose to translate the captured
movements by combining the data into 3D coordinates to
form path-like patterns. Again, generated by a custom
Processing script, this translation showed each participant’s
unique crochet movements as an abstract form (Fig.7).

uncertainty that was expressed (such as “why doesn’t it
look more like crochet?”) was responded to by developing a
new translation design with the intention to show the data
more recognisably as stitches or rhythm. For this purpose
we translated the x, y and z components of the data into
three separate, concentric radials (Fig. 10). For example,
the left radial shape shows fairly steady movements of one
participant with only minor outliers compared to the more
varied movements of another participant on the right
resulting in a more jagged shape.

Figure 7: Three participants’ unique movement translations

These digital translations were then translated again into
physical forms by laser engraving and cutting a variety of
materials. Additionally the digital patterns were translated
into an extruded 3D model via a heatmap script and 3D
printed. We used a range of materials: card, fabric, perspex
and wood (Fig. 8). This was due to our growing awareness
of the importance of the tactile experience of different
materials to the crochet practitioners. Alongside the laser
cut translations, we also added print outs of the same paths
to see if this would elicit a different reaction. In the
workshop we then presented these materials (Fig.9) without
the crochet practitioners knowing how the shapes were
generated and also unidentified so that they didn't know
which shape was associated with which person. In this way,
we sought to encourage discussion about the shapes, their
techniques and the relations between them. We then
revealed whose shape was whose and were more active in
explaining and sharing the process with the participants,
including showing them the sketch that generated the form
amongst other graph-like representations of their data.

Figure 9: (a) Different materials in the first workshop and
(b) comparing translations in the second

Figure 10: Radial translations for second workshop

During this workshop we started by discussing the old and
new shapes that were made before introducing the
interactive data path generator. Initially, we got them to
crochet with the sensor-augmented hook blind (Fig.11a) so
that only the other participants could see the shape being
generated while the practitioner was focusing on their craft.
We then let them go through the same process again but
with the shape being generated visibly on screen. We then
compared and discussed both shapes and encouraged them
to choose a shape that we would laser cut together.

Figure 8: One participant’s translations in different materials

For the next iteration, we took on board participants’
feedback from the first workshop. In particular, there was a
strong desire to see the shapes being generated live, to “see
how it works”. This was responded to by developing the
initial path generation script further so as to be able to
stream real-time data from the sensor on the crochet hook
directly to a path being generated on screen. Other

Figure 11: (a) The interactive shape generation system in
action (b) a personalised laser cut shape

The second part of this workshop took place in our lab’s
machine room where we showed, explained and used the
laser cutter (Fig.12) to cut the personalised shapes while

giving participants the possibility to make changes, add
holes for potential use, or scale to a size they liked
(Fig.11b). After all the shapes were cut, we closed the
workshop with a discussion about the process of generating
and fabricating their shapes. These workshops were all
documented via audio and video recordings which were
transcribed for analysis alongside the researchers’ field
notes and observations.

showed me that I can be quite meticulous and pay attention
to detail”. This shows how the artefact encouraged the craft
practitioners to think about their craft practice in a different
way. Another participant noted: “I was thinking about my
crochet, I do keep my hands quite still and quite close and
that’s maybe why it [the shape] is kind of quite narrow”. In
all these ways, our data translations provided an occasion
for the practitioners to reflect on and compare their
different ways of doing their craft.
Making Meaning Through Association

Figure 12: Laser cutting the shapes
Observations
Reflective Conversations

Throughout all the workshops with the crochet
practitioners, we found that extensive discussions took
place about different crochet techniques, encouraged by the
shape of the artefacts and comparisons between them. For
example, one of the participants observed: “I think this is
mine because it is quite dense” describing her movements
as quite jerky. Similarly one of the participants suggested,
pointing at a more curved shape, “maybe this could be
yours because you twist more”. This reasoning, comparison
and sharing of shapes was a common feature in both
workshops and highlights how these shapes encouraged
associations and reflection on their crochet techniques.
In other cases, the conversations about crochet techniques
and how a person handles their crochet hook were taken as
suggestive of the participant’s personality. The attendees to
one workshop reasoned that one shape must belong to a
person who could not attend because her movements are
more exaggerated and “that’s the personality that she is”.
While in other conversations a participant said “I hope this
is mine” because she liked the particular shape it made
admiring its neat and symmetrical form.
Aided by the controlled workshop setting and the directly
comparable multiple objects, this reasoning and comparison
work was very noticeable with participants potentially
seeing a close, valuable relationship between the data
artefacts and themselves due to the embodied connection
between the data and their craft practice. As one of the
participants reflected on her shape after the first workshop:
“Its form is very concentrated and made me think about
how I perform craft activities. I have often thought that I am
a bit clumsy and imprecise when I am working but that

Throughout the workshops numerous associations were
made between the generated shapes and more familiar
forms. For example, the radial shapes were associated with
flowers or poppies, the live generated shapes were
compared to airplanes, comets, fish, bees or a “cocoon
made by a drunk caterpillar” (Fig.13b). It is important to
note how such associations are used in conversations
between our participants. The shape associations were
related to the participants’ craft practices in a number of
interesting and consequential ways. For instance, a shape
taken to look like a flower was considered as the basis for
the design of a brooch. In other cases, these associations
compactly summarised various features of the data, such as
densities, repeated patterns, curves and outliers. For
example the association to a bee has a clear distinction
between a dense body and the less dense curved wings (Fig.
13a). One participant reflected on this process being
interesting because “you could see which bits were the
dense bits and which bits were the bits where you are
moving around a bit more”.

Figure 13: Shape associations (a) a “bee” and (b) “cocoon
made by a drunk caterpillar”
Use, Value and Meaning

Our participants were not confined to these associations of
generated shapes and familiar forms. For one of the crochet
practitioners: “I like that it visualises a tradition”. She
characterised the artefact as being “written in secret crochet
code” which, for her, signified her “struggling and (more or
less) succeeding to learn a skill I’d always admired and
associated with my granny and mum”. In this way, the
artefact enables her to link up a tradition, her own
remembrance of her family, and her current struggles. She
reported that she had taken one of the data translations and
“placed [it] on my mantelpiece for me to feel proud of ”
(see Fig.14b), a site one can interpret as a special place in
her home. Another participant placed her 3D print in her

studio after showing it to her family saying that she finds
the print and the idea of 3D printing “inspirational”.

through fabricating the shapes “it was more real for me”
which other participants agreed to.
Extending the Craft and Reciprocity

Figure 14 (a) 'trying on' the shapes and (b) on the mantelpiece

This shows an interest in the shapes as themselves having a
potential value in and for her practice, perhaps in terms of
future developments of it. “I have my piece of 3D printing
on the shelf in my studio. […] I got to show people at the
studio especially during the Art Tour and people were
interested in the idea of transferring movement into a
sculpture.” Different uses of the artefacts were explored,
such as coasters, badges or hair clips. “They would look
great on a jacket with the colour coming through.” Others
thought of ways to embellish their shape: “I like to put
flowers on mine”. The relative abstraction of the shapes,
without any particular pre-determined use, enabled the
participants to meaningfully appropriate their shapes and
sparked their creativity. Taken together, these examples
suggest an emerging recognition that our craft (data
translation) might come to have a role in theirs (crochet and
allied practices) either reminding participants of their proud
embeddedness within a tradition or in terms of providing
inspiration or actual materials which might be of practical
use – a point we will shortly return to.
The (Dis)entanglement of Fabrication

In our later workshop, we involved our crochet practitioners
end to end in the fabrication process from data capture
through visualisations to the creation of laser cut shapes.
One of the participants stated that they “liked having input
into how they [the shapes] were made […] and seeing the
different aspects of it”. And when asked about how that
compared to just receiving their shapes the previous time, a
participant said it was good “going through the whole
process of seeing it happening, seeing the difference, how it
looked on screen, deciding and then printing [laser
cutting]”. With these comments the participants clearly
stated the value of their involvement not only in the
fabrication process but also in data capture and shape
generation, “so it feels like it kind of has more meaning”
than in the previous workshop where shapes were presented
without the crochet practitioners being involved in their
creation beyond being the source of the data. This shows
that the more concerted involvement of participants with
the capture of their own data and first hand acquaintance
with the steps involved in digital fabrication not only
encourages reflection and conversation but allows for
meaningful engagement. One participant commented that

Seeing the shape generated on screen while crocheting
clearly influenced the participants’ way of crocheting by
either looking to see what the shape looked like or by
slowing down to see what happens. One participant even
stopped to just move the hook around to see how the shape
responded to her movements. This showed that the
participants were very keen to understand how the data and
its translation related to their movements. Indeed, one
participant wanted to try to perform what she called
“interpretative crochet” in a joking reference to
‘interpretative dance’, where she influenced the generated
shape by the way she crocheted rather than vice versa.

Figure 15: Woodcut printed shape

With these examples, we can already see how the
practitioners were beginning to become more engaged in
the overall activity of data capture, translation and
fabrication, and started to explore possibilities in their own
interpretative ways. While this was initially done to better
understand how the data translation occurred, our
practitioners’ curiosity has developed further with one
participant developing an idea during the second workshop
to use one of the laser engraved shapes for woodcut printing
in her artwork. As we didn’t have enough time to laser cut a
new personalised shape in this workshop, she took one of
the pre-fabricated radial ones with her and posted a picture
of the woodcut print on Twitter only a few hours later:
“Print of a digital crochet engraving” (Fig. 15). As an artist
she works with different printing techniques and had her
own materials ready to hand to test this.
This example further emphasises a point suggested earlier.
As our work with the crochet practitioners unfolded and
they became progressively more aware of, and participated
in, the making of their data translations, there is a shift from
the researchers’ interest in exploring the participants craft
practice to, equally, the participants exploring the
researchers’ practice to use this as inspiration in their own
work. This mutual reciprocity of practices was a surprising

development within the project and was in part enabled by
the longer-term engagement we had with the participants.
Importantly, it was also clear that, as design researchers, we
were displaying aesthetic choices and creative judgments in
our own work and the character of these and their rationale
became, naturally, matters of curiosity for the participants.
This relationship between craft and research practitioner
developed through mutual interest in the other’s practice
and attests to the engaging aspects of the data translation
activities we devised. It also shows an extensibility of craft
practice in creative ways that has potential to combine new
digital technologies with traditional art and craft practices.

and translation enriches participants’ opportunities for
meaning making, as does taking part in the fabrication of
the end-product. As Willis et al. have shown by turning 3D
spatial drawings into laser cut objects: “There appears to be
something inherently satisfying in the integral process of
creating and realizing a design in physical form” [25, p.12].
Although we agree, their controlled setting differs from our
‘in the wild’ approach at the conference and our intensive
exploratory sessions with the practitioners. This has enabled
us to give more detail as to how such an ‘inherent
satisfaction’ arises.

DISCUSSION: JOINING THE THREADS

With the tweet translations, we had to obtain adequately
meaningful data engagement while being mindful of the
needs of the context. This required us to focus
on the duration and simplicity of the activity rather than the
depth of engagement with the data itself. Our later
workshop with the craft practitioners also brought home to
us how many steps there were in passing from their
embodied practice, through data capture, selection, scaling,
display and fabrication on machines which themselves need
to be carefully configured with specially edited data files.
As sociologists of science have repeatedly emphasised,
these painstaking ‘re-representation paths’ [10] are often
abbreviated in published accounts with a consequent
erasure of the craft skills of the researchers themselves. By
conducting our fabrication sessions in the manner we did,
where our own conduct became visible and accountable, we
were reminded of how many steps to the process there
were, how much aesthetic judgment is built in to the
creation of shapes, and how skilled the operation of
fabrication technology is.

Working in two specific contexts we have explored new
ways for situating digital fabrication within data translation
activities to enrich reflection and interaction. Let us now
draw on the findings of both projects and compare the two
contexts and our experiences in them so as to formulate
some design concepts which might help shape future
research on situated participatory fabrication. It is in these
concepts, exemplified by the work reported here, that we
intend the main contributions of our research to reside.
Data Translation as Meaning Making

In both contexts, all participants showed curiosity to find
out what their fabricated shape would look like and were
eager to understand how the shape related to their actions.
The process of engaging participants with their data, be it
generated in real-time (crochet) or previously created
(tweets), and involving them in the translation into
fabricated forms has occasioned interpretative, sense
making activities. These may concern the significance of a
particular feature within the form (a spike or a repeating
pattern), an association with a familiar shape, a connection
with a particular event, or deliberations on personal history
or the nature of craft practice. The tweet data was
encountered, in a sense, ‘ready made’ rather than captured
in an inspectable way during the fabrication sessions. This
made it difficult, though not impossible, for participants to
experimentally modify their behavior to see its
consequences for data translation and fabrication. For the
conference attendees, as a consequence, the shapes were
less ‘legible’ or understandable and needed more
explanation and description by the researcher. In the craft
practice workshops in contrast, data was captured live from
the embodied actions of participants and, accordingly, its
significance could be interrogated concurrently. The more
extensive engagement of crochet practitioners in data
generation and translation, and indeed their participation in
our whole research process, has helped them create an
artefact that “feels like it kind of has more meaning”.
With these differing ways of data engagement, we suggest
that there is an important relationship between the kind of
active involvement in the translation of data and the
meaning invested in the tangible artefacts and the overall
experience. We suggest that participation in data capture

Situating Data in a Trajectory of Use

Recapturing the steps suggests that it is appropriate to see
data in a whole trajectory of use, where data might go
through many translations, including those between
different material forms. Indeed, our participants often
considered extending these trajectories into future uses
beyond the research encounter itself, whether these data
were tweets or body movements and those future uses were
as wearable clips or printing blocks.
If we see fabricated artefacts as situated within an extended
trajectory of use, this can influence the forms data
translation and fabrication can take. In both of our cases,
the relative abstractness and ambiguity [4] of the shapes we
made helped people appropriate them in a variety of ways.
While the shapes could be related to tweet behavior and
craft movements, respectively, they had a visual interest in
their own right, enabling people to creatively entertain a
variety of future uses. If we understand data translations
within a trajectory of use, it seems that they should be done
under an interesting dual auspice of adequacy to the data on
the one hand and requisite ambiguity with respect to future
use on the other.

From Data Materialisation to Data Translation

Throughout this paper, we have referred to our work as
concerning ‘data translation’ rather than the more common
phrase of ‘data materialisation’. This is worth commenting
on. It is important to us that we refrain from a simplistic
divide between the ‘material’ (e.g. crochet yarn) and
‘immaterial’ (e.g. digital data) though conflation of the
digital (or the virtual) with the immaterial is often made
unreflectively or even as a matter of philosophical
commitment in some sources [1]. Similarly, the concept of
‘data sculptures’ [24] as fixed artefacts embodying data to
convey meaning seems reductive for our purpose. We
suggest (a) a more active role of the user in the creation of
the artefact and its meaning, and (b) data being seen not as
fixed but as a malleable medium open to interpretation and
translation in multiple ways. We therefore refer to data
translations to highlight that data is translated through
different material media and that this can be a painstaking
process involving careful data refinement, materials
selection, aesthetic judgment, anticipations of future use. In
all these respects, speaking of data materialisation
encourages a simplification of the processes involved. To
put the point as an aphorism: there is more to 3D printing
than just printing out.
Data-Things and Social Objects

We have argued for situating digital fabrication within
participatory data translation and making practices and have
outlined some of the benefits of so doing. We feel that our
approach takes a more fundamental approach than that of
Ogawa et al [17], as we are not merely focusing on aspects
of the fabrication process that “stimulates communication
in society” but are exploring the impact of direct
involvement in the fabrication process itself – in as
extended a sense of that process as is practically possible.
Our work has more in common with Nissen et al. [16] in
seeing fabrication as a matter to embed within situated
social practices – in that case, souvenir-making with
visitors to an art exhibition. We extend this work in a
number of ways. First, we have explored a variety of
different settings and practical strategies for fabrication in a
manner that is in sensitive response to an opportunity and
its context. Second, we have been able to sustain a longterm relationship with a group of practitioners which has
helped us to explore a more end-to-end participatory
fabrication encounter. Third, we have focused on how
personally-relevant data can be captured and deployed in
fabrication, conceiving of data in an extended trajectory of
use.
To express this compactly and to extend the use of Ingold
[7] made by [16], we conceive of our artefacts as ‘datathings’ – highlighting that mere objects can become ‘living
things’ for someone through their participation in the
making process. In a similar fashion, Nina Simon [22]
writes about a ‘social object’ “as one that connects the
people who create, own, use, critique, or consume it. Social
objects are transactional, facilitating exchanges among

those who encounter them.” We believe that the conference
attendees and crochet practitioners we have worked with
orient towards our artefacts as social objects, as data-things.
From Mutual Curiosity to Hybrid Research Practices

In both of our studies, the curiosity that participants had in
our research was notable. Part of this is, naturally, to do
with the relative novelty of the technologies we are using.
But, above this, our work stimulated people’s imaginations
into suggesting extensions to our own research as well as
future uses for fabrication technologies in general. The
curiosity that participants have for the research process is a
matter that is often ignored but can well shape the value
that they perceive in designed artefacts [5].
This curiosity developed in an unexpected manner in the
second study which is of particular interest to discuss here.
As our relationship with the crochet practitioners deepened,
we have noted that a reciprocal interest in each other’s
activities as craft emerged. This suggests that we can
speculate on the possibility of hybrid practices which
combine craftwork with research in novel ways. In existing
work, Rosner has investigated how digital technology can
mediate craft practice [20] and elicit reflection [21], while
Zoran [27] has combined digitally fabricated elements with
traditional craft techniques. The relevance and value of DIY
making to HCI has been acknowledged with Lindtner et al.
[11] recommending a collaborative approach for
researchers to work more directly with makers and the
maker community to develop innovative research
initiatives. While our work is consistent with these
approaches and recommendations, in our second study, we
have tried to forge yet more intimate connections with craft
practice, first, through exploring the potential of translating
embodied craft movements into unique tangible artefacts
and then by deepening the possibilities for reciprocal
participation between craft and research worlds. Exploring
what these hybrid craft-research practices might look like
and what data-things they might make is our future work.
CONCLUDING REMARKS

Through two case studies, we have progressively explored
an approach to working with fabrication technologies which
emphasises participation in data translation and the creation
of artefacts which are derived from personal experience
(e.g. tweets) or skill (e.g. craft movements). We have
demonstrated that direct involvement in digital fabrication
can help people invest meaning into artefacts and facilitate
reflection while encouraging practitioners, reciprocally, to
incorporate new forms into their work. To close, we
summarise some design concepts arising from our
reflection on our work and the different contexts in which
we have engaged. In condensed form:
• Data translation is a matter of investing meaning. As we
translate data from one form to another and fabricate
artefacts on that basis we are creating occasions for
meaning making and reflection.

• Understand data in a trajectory of use. Data undergoes
multiple translations and changes of significance, some
predating our interventions, some which we effect
ourselves, some which are in the hands of others in the
future. Accordingly, it is often right to
• Create artefacts with a requisite ambiguity and
abstraction to enable varied appropriation in use.
• Consider personally relevant data as a malleable
material and facilitate participation in its capture and
translation so as to create
• Living data-things rather than ready-made objects.
Through this, we can open out the possibility of
• Hybrid research practices where research and other
crafts are intertwined.
While it is not always possible to explore all of these
concepts simultaneously, and one of our studies shows the
compromises that often have to be made, we hope we have
outlined a novel image of how personal data can be worked
with in participatory fabrication activities. In so doing, we
hope we offer productive perspectives on digital fabrication
beyond its use as a tool for manufacture, while furthering
the cultural and research conversations around personal
data and its use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank our participants and those who have helped us in
this work, particularly Andrew Garbett, Thomas Smith and
Gavin Wood for technical support. This work was funded
by a UK AHRC KE Hub for the Creative Economy grant
ref: AH/J005150/1 Creative Exchange.
REFERENCES

1. Baudrillard, J. The Gulf War Did Not Take Place.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.
2. Blikstein, P. and Krannich, P. The Makers' Movement
and FabLabs in Education: Experiences, Technologies,
and Research. In Proc. IDC '13. ACM (2013), 613-616.
3. Ehn, P. (1988). Work-Oriented Design of Computer
Artifacts. Stockholm: Arbetslivescentrum.
4. Gaver, W., Beaver, J. and Benford, S. Ambiguity as a
Resource for Design. In Proc. CHI’03. ACM (2003),
233-240.
5. Gaver, W., Bowers, J., Boehner, K. et al. Indoor
Weather Stations: Investigating a Ludic Approach to
Environmental HCI Through Batch Prototyping. In
Proc. CHI’13. ACM (2013). 3451-3460.
6. Gershenfeld, N. Fab: The Coming Revolution on Your
Desktop-From Personal Computers to Personal
Fabrication. Basic Books, 2008.
7. Ingold, T. Making: Anthropolgy, Archaeology, Art and
Architecture. Routledge, 2013.
8. Khot, R., Hjorth, L. and Mueller, F. Understanding
Physical Activity through 3D Printed Material Artifacts.
In Proc. CHI '14. ACM (2014). 3835-3844.
9. Kuznetsov, S. and Paulos, E. Rise of the Expert
Amateur: DIY Projects , Communities , and Cultures. In
Proc. NordiCHI ’10. ACM (2010). 295–304.

10. Latour, B. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists
and Engineers Through Society. Harvard University
Press, 1987.
11. Lindtner, S. Hertz, G., Dourish, P. Emerging Sites of
HCI Innovation: Hackerspaces, Hardware Startups &
Incubators. In Proc. CHI’14. ACM (2014). 1-10.
12. Lupton, D. Self-tracking Cultures: Towards a Sociology
of Personal Informatics. In Proc. OZCHI’14. ACM 2014
13. Malone, E. and Lipson, H. Fab@Home: The Personal
Desktop Fabricator Kit. Rapid Prototyping Journal 13,
4 (2007). 245–255.
14. Mellis, D., Follmer, S., Hartmann, B. et al. FAB at CHI:
Digital Fabrication Tools, Design, and Community.
In Proc. CHI EA '13. ACM (2013). 3307-3310.
15. Mueller, S., Lopes, P., and Baudisch, P. Interactive
Construction: Interactive Fabrication of Functional
Mechanical Devices. In Proc. UIST ’12. ACM (2012).
599-606.
16. Nissen, B., Bowers, J., Wright, P. et al. Volvelles,
Domes and Wristbands: Embedding Digital Fabrication
within a Visitor's Trajectory of Engagement. In Proc.
DIS '14. ACM (2014). 825-834.
17. Ogawa, H., Mara, M., Lindinger, C., et al. Shadowgram:
A Case Study for Social Fabrication through Interactive
Fabrication in Public Spaces. In Proc. TEI’12. ACM
(2012). 57-60.
18. Posch, I., Ogawa, H., Lindinger, et al. Introducing the
FabLab as Interactive Exhibition Space. In Proc.
IDC ’10. ACM (2010). 254-257.
19. Quantified Self www.quantifiedself.com [acc. Sept’14]
20. Rosner, D. Mediated Crafts: Digital Practices around
Creative Handwork. In Proc. CHI EA’10. ACM (2010).
2955-2958.
21. Rosner, D., Ryokai, K. Reflections on Craft: Probing the
Creative Process of Everyday Knitters. In Proc.
C&C’09. ACM (2009). 195-204.
22. Simon, N., The Participatory Museum. Santa Cruz:
Museum 2.0, 2010.
23. Tanenbaum, J.G., Williams, A.M., Desjardins, A., and
Tanenbaum, K. Democratizing Technology  : Pleasure,
Utility and Expressiveness in DIY and Maker Practice.
In Proc. CHI ’13. ACM (2013). 2603–2612.
24. Vande Moere, A. Beyond the Tyranny of the Pixel:
Exploring the Physicality of Information Visualization.
In Proc. IV’08. IEEE Computer Society(2008). 469-474
25. Willis, K.D.D, Lin, J., Mitani, J. et al. Spatial Sketch:
Bridging Between Movement & Fabrication. In Proc.
TEI’10. ACM (2010). 5-12.
26. Willis, K.D.D., Xu, C., Wu, K.-J., et al. Interactive
Fabrication: New Interfaces for Digital Fabrication. In
Proc. TEI ’11. ACM (2011). 69–72.
27. Zoran, A. Hybrid Basketry: Interweaving Digital
Practice within Contemporary Craft. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2013 Art Gallery (SIGGRAPH ‘13). ACM.
324-331.

