See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276375844

Novel Physical Representations for the Visualisation of Science Data and
Mathematics
Conference Paper · April 2015
DOI: 10.5176/2251-1679_CGAT15.01

CITATIONS

READS

0

230

1 author:
Paul Bourke
122 PUBLICATIONS 1,088 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Murujuga: Dynamics of the Dreaming View project

Photography View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Paul Bourke on 17 May 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Novel physical representations for the visualisation of
science data and mathematics
Paul Bourke
iVEC @ The University of Western Australia
Perth, Australia
paul.bourke@uwa.edu.au
Abstract—Here we present technologies one normally encounter
being used for frivolous merchandising, to the presentation and
visualisation of scientific data and mathematics. Three particular
print technologies will be presented, they are glasses free
lenticular prints, 3D printing (also known as rapid prototyping)
and crystal engraving. The relative merits of each technology will
be presented, what forms of data they are most suited to, the
challenges and limitations, and some details of how required data
formats are created. The discussion will be illustrated by
examples from the authors application of the technologies in the
context of creating engaging data presentations and visualisation
for research, public outreach, education, museum and art gallery
exhibition.

•

Delicacy. Some devices may not be suitably robust for use
by the public. Care for devices can be taken by researchers
in the laboratory who more fully understand the
limitations and the consequences of damage.

•

Specificity. Some devices, particular human computer
interfaces, may require some training in order to gain
optimal benefit. They may additionally need to be fitted or
adapted to the individual, again acceptable for a small
groups of researchers but not the wider public.

•

Portability. Specialised displays are often fixed in their
location or may be heavy and thus not readily relocated.

Keywords-component; Visualisation, data representation
lenticular, crystal engraving, 3D printing, rapid prototype,
hologram, glasses free.

•

Health and safety. Devices such as head mounted displays
(HMDs) and even glasses for stereoscopic displays have a
means of transmitting medical conditions due to skin-toskin contact. Immersive displays can result in balance
issues in some people, stereoscopy can induce eye strain
and headaches in approximately the 10\% of the
population who are susceptible.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The visualisation of scientific data and mathematics often
employs high end graphics hardware and advanced human
computer interfaces. For example stereoscopic displays are used
to present geometrically complicated structures, the additional
sense of depth provided by these displays can greatly enhance
both the researchers understanding of the structure but also
convey that same insight to their peers and members of the
public. High resolution displays can also be used to assist with
the resolving of data structures resulting in a reduced need to
continually zoom in and out, the process of which is a tradeoff
between seeing the detail and understanding the global context.
Surround displays are sometimes used to immerse the viewer in
the data, to give a sense of "being there" with the resulting
heightened engagement. Finally, displays designed for
visualisation in the sciences and mathematics can employ novel
human computer interface devices to provide richer
multidimensional control or, in the case of haptic devices, an
interaction that leverages the additional sense of touch through
our hands and fingers.
There are a number of characteristics the above laboratory
based and bespoke visualisation displays and devices possess
that can limit their use outside the research organisation where
they are hosted. Some of these are:
•

Cost. Expensive equipment, while safe in the research
laboratory and in the hands of the researchers, may not
suit a more public and unsupervised environment. Even
the cost of insurance to move the hardware can in some
cases be prohibitive.

These factors can make it difficult to present data in rich and
engaging ways outside the research laboratory. This might
include for example at conferences, in museums, as part of art
gallery exhibitions, to the public and in the classroom
environment. On the other hand one only needs to glance at
touristic shops in cities or airports around the world to see a
number of novel technologies that are being used to present and
sell various forms of merchandise. Can these technologies be
used to present data in science and mathematics in equally
engaging ways and at more appropriate price points. In the
remainder of this paper three possibilities that have been
explored by the author will be discussed. The choice has been
limited to the creation of physical objects rather than the many
purely digital technologies that may be employed such as
through novel browser based interfaces, on smart phones,
through social media, augmented reality, gaming engines and
so on.
The three technologies to be discussed are lenticular prints,
rapid prototyping, and crystal engraving. The technology for
each will be introduced and the opportunities it offers discussed
along with the limitations. This will be in the context of actual
practice by the author and in each case one or two examples
will be presented along with technical details on how the data
needs to be prepared and pre-processed in order to make it
realisable with the technology.

II.

LENTICULAR PRINTS

Providing depth perception by exploiting stereopsis
(consequence of human binocular vision) has been a standard
visualisation tool for over 30 years, becoming mainstream with
the invention of the CRT display. The benefits for the
understanding of geometrically complicated datasets by
supporting depth perception is intuitively obvious and this was
born out in practice. The change in the last 5 years has been the
increased commoditisation of the technology at least for 3D
television size displays, once only the domain of well funded
laboratories. There is however a gap between the digital
stereo3D capable display and the more traditional printed
means of presenting data that is still relevant even today.
Researchers use stereoscopic 3D displays in the laboratory but
are reduced to flat 2 dimensional representations in print,
posters and at conferences.
There are a few options for representing depth in printed
form. As with any 3D presentation there fundamentally needs
to be a left and right eye channel which are presented
independently to each eye. At one end of the spectrum are
anaglyphic prints, these separate the channels by using two
colours and the viewer to required to wear matching glasses.
While anaglyph prints have many desirable properties, for
example they can included in standard print material and on
unmodified digital displays, they generally have poor colour
fidelity. Another option are full synthetic holograms [1], while
these are glasses free they currently have a high associated cost
and have an uncertain future since they rely on film as the high
resolution medium for capturing the light field. The method
presented here uses the familiar lenticular [2] sheets that are
traditionally used for gimmicky cards of sports people
distributed in cereal packets, cheap touristic postcards, and 3D
views of spiritual icons. These can be employed to show
multiple objects and even simple animations but the interest
here will be limited to multiple views of a single object
resulting in the sensation of depth.
Lenticular technology is a convenient way to induce depth
perception, it is a print from a normal high resolution printer
subsequently mounted onto the lens layer. It exists as a physical
object that can be hung on a wall or passed around. It does not
require any form of eyewear to separate the channels, as such it
is referred to as autostereoscopic and incurs minimal eye strain.
Finally, they can be produced for a modest cost, and replicated
for even less.
The detailed theory behind how lenticular or the simpler
barrier strip displays or prints work will be left to the reader [2]
In the case of the barrier strip method a left and right pair of
images are multiplexed vertically, the barrier strip ensures the
left eye sees only the vertical strips from the original left eye
image, and the right eye only sees the strips from the original
right eye image. In the case of lenticular prints the barriers are
replaced by small lenses and instead of just two, a number of
images are multiplexed vertically. The lenticular lenses present
these vertical strips each in their own viewing zones, if the
images are created correctly each pair of viewing zones
presents a pair of images to the viewers eyes and every pair is a
valid stereo pair. The parallax effect of looking around the
object is supported when moving ones head horizontally if each

image is computed along a path in front of the object. While the
source images for lenticular prints can be created
photographically, we are only interested here in synthetic data
representations.
The image creation then involves creating multiple
renditions of the 3D model, each pair of rendered images being
a valid stereo pair, see figure 1. The range over which the
camera is translated and the field of view of the camera are
determined directly from the final viewing conditions (size of
the print and the distance it will be from the intended viewing
position), as is the case with all correct stereoscopic content
creation. An example of images rendered from a model of
Australian indigenous rock art is shown in figure 2. The number
of images required depends on a few factors, the lenticule
resolution here uses about 25 images. The different parallax can
be seen in the final frame compared to the first few frames.
Two views of the resulting lenticular print can be seen in the
photographs in figure 3, while the 3D nature cannot be captured
here the difference in parallax is visible.

Figure 1. Straight camera path. Field of view and distance of the virtual
camera from the object determined by the geometry of the lenticular sheet and
planned viewing distance.

Figure 2. Sample images from a camera moving along linear path, note the
parallax between the earlier and later image in the sequence.

Figure 3. Two photographs of the final lenticular print from two view points
of an example from Australian indigenous rock art.

III.

RAPID PROTOTYPING

Visualisation, as the name implies, generally uses our sense
of vision in order to convey information to the human brain.
Sonification is the term given to the use of our sense of hearing
in the visualisation process. While there are obvious examples
of this such as the Geiger counter or the hospital "machine that
goes ping", the conversion of data into audio or music is
generally in support of visuals rather than instead of. Haptics is
the use of our sense of touch for visualisation but this is
generally mediated though the use of a mechanical and
imperfect force feedback system. An alternative to haptics is to
create a physical model of data, this allows the object to be
explored using exactly the same natural eye-hand coordination
we use to explore and understand 3D objects in our real world.
While rapid prototyping has been round for at least 20
years, it was rarely used outside the realm of industrial product
design. Recent advances in rapid prototyping (RP), more
commonly now known as simply 3D printing, has enabled a
much wider range of objects to be realisable than was possible
10 years ago as well as printing in a wider range of materials.
Today the techniques are increasingly becoming commoditised
including online bureau services [3] both high end machines
capable of very intricate and general designs [4] to low cost
machines [5] that may not have the same finesse of design
capability but are accessible at a much lower price point. In
order for a particular structure to be realisable it must meet a
number of conditions.
•

RP machine can only create solid objects, that is, they
cannot print the idealised points, lines, and planes often
used within computer graphics based visualisations. Such
ideal mathematically building blocks need to be given
thickness to become "physical".

•

The digital representation of the model surface must be
watertight, that is, it needs to be a closed mesh without
gaps or cracks arising from numerical imperfections.

•

A particular 3D printing method and material imposes
limits on the finest structures that can be built. The limit
may be due to cleaning or other post processing stages, or
it may simply be related to the strength of the underlying
material. Current top of the range 3D printing in
monochrome (any single colour) can resolve filaments
down to about 0.75mm whereas full colour printers [6] are
generally limited to at least 5mm.

•

For practical reasons a model needs to be in one piece
otherwise each piece should be considered as separate
models.

•

There is a maximum size that can be created given a
particular printing technology.

•

The cost, except for some more exotic coatings in precious
metals, is a function of the volume of material used. In
some cases the way the model is represented may
influence the cost, for example large portions may be
created hollow.

All the above generally mean that software written to
convert data into 3D printable geometry needs to have a certain

rigor. Two particular commonly encountered requirements are
how to represent curves (infinitely thin lines) or planar surfaces
(also infinitely thin). It should be noted that all geometry will be
transferred to the RP machine as planar approximations of
higher level curves or surfaces, otherwise known in computer
graphics as a triangulated (3 vertex bounded region of an
infinitely thin plane) mesh.
The simplest method of creating lines with thickness is to
replicate spheres along the curve or its straight line
approximations, see figure 4. While simple, because each
sphere is represented by a large number of triangular faces, it is
a very inefficient method. Doubly inefficient since a large
number of spheres may be required for a smooth representation
of the line or curve. Slightly better is to remove all triangular
faces internal to the spheres, this is a very fast test that reduces
the triangle count significantly. A more efficient method is to
sweep cylinders along each line segment of the curve, see
figure 5. There are a number of ways the transition between two
line segments can be handled, they all work tolerably well for
slowly changing angles but some methods work better than
other for sharp angles. It should be noted that invisible
geometry due to overlapping spheres or cylinders is not an issue
except that it may be less than optimal efficiency.

Figure 4. Distributing closed spheres along the curve (left). Optionally
removing internal triangular faces making up each sphere (right).

Figure 5. Each row illustrates various methods of thickening a curve using
cylinders and spheres. Most work acceptably for low curvature line sequences
(left column) but are differentiated by sharp angles (right column).

Outside surface

Inside surface

Figure 6. Problem with simple extrusion of surfaces for sharp angles (top
right), rolling ball algorithm proposed by the author (bottom right).

The representation of spheres or cylinders by a triangular
mesh involves a discrete approximation to the surface and as
such a sphere is much more expensive than a cylinder for the
same fidelity. For example if a cylinder is approximated by 10
degree steps, there are a total of 108 triangular faces (36 at each
end and 2 for each extruded face). A sphere represented in the
normal polar coordinates parameterisation (not the most
efficient) would require 1296 triangular faces (36 lines of
longitude, 18 lines of latitude, and 2 triangles per face). As such
it is common to use more efficient representations of spheres
such as recursive tessellations of a platonic solid followed by
vertex radius normalisation, but even there the triangle cost of
spheres for the same degree of surface smoothness is generally
significantly higher than for cylinders.
As with the thickening of lines, 2D surfaces also need to be
given some thickness. Intuitively one might imagine extruding
each planar section perpendicular to the normal of the plane,
see top row of figure 6. Note that this introduces the notion of
an "inside" and "outside" to the surface, the inside being the
direction the planar section is extruded in. The main problem
with this approach is the punch-through for corners with greater
than a right angle turn. The solution proposed by the author is
called the "rolling ball" algorithm. Imagine a ball rolling on the
inside of the surface. Create the extruded surface by tracing out
the position of the point on the ball most distant to the surface.
The resulting thickened surface has an embedded notion of the
inside and outside surface in so far as the inside surface is
smoother than the outside surface since concave transitions are
replaced by smoothed areas of the rolling sphere.
Models such as those discussed here are conveyed to the RP
machine by means of a data file that describes the geometry in
terms of triangular faces. The exact file format used may
depend on the machine, the vendors software, and whether
colour [6] is supported. The most basic file format for
monochrome models is the STL format, an extremely simple
file format to create and one that heralds from the early days of
STereoLithography, hence its name. Simple colour models are
most simply conveyed as WRL or X3D formats, both of which
originated from the VRML standard of the 1980 intended to
present 3D models in the context of the web browser. Textured
models can be described in a number of formats but the
simplest is as Wavefront OBJ files, these are all plain text
formats and are thus relatively straightforward to create from
ones own software.

Figure 7. Mathematical knot illustrates circle extruded curves (left), extruded
mine model surface (right).

Figure 8. Computer rendering of linked toroidal space filling [7] (left), 3D
printed version (right) also illustrating infomration carried through real world
lighting of the printed models.

IV.

CRYSTAL ENGRAVING

As discussed above, RP models cannot represent points and
are only appropriate for single connected models. There are
many imaginable examples where RP processes would be
unsuitable as a means of physically representing data. One such
example would be representing the points from a galaxy survey,
which, while simple to draw on a computer display would be
totally unsuitable for 3D printing since it would result in simply
a collection of unattached points, see figure 9.
There is however a 3D printing technology ideally suited to
such non-connected data, indeed ideally suited to astronomy
data. It can often be found in tourist shops around the world,
stores dealing in glass and crystal works, and there is even a
world wide franchise where a persons bust or favorite pet can
be photographed and printed. The technique is laser based
printing [8] within solid glass blocks, although other shapes are
possible. The basic technology is called Sub Surface Laser
Engraving (SSLE) and involves focusing a laser beam at
precise locations within the crystal block, at each position a
small bubble forms representing one data point. The accuracy at
which these bubbles can formed is very high and they can be
smaller than 1/10mm in diameter.

There are clearly a number of limitations of this technology
that are fundamental in the process.
•

Colour is not possible, the bubbles only appear as white
dots due to scattering of incident light through the crystal
block. It is however possible to illuminate the crystal
block with coloured light (usually a coloured LED light
base) and some practitioners have used this with some
success.

•

The dots are of fixed size so they cannot be used directly
to represent grey scale information. However the dot
density can be varied within a region to convey a linear
scale and it should be noted this is not so much a
limitation of the technology as much as the limitation of
the current implementations. In theory variable powered
lasers could produce a range of bubbles sizes.

•

There is a limit on the bubble density, localised defects
and even cracks will appear if the bubble density is too
high, for example, if the bubbles overlap. Equally, if the
point density is too low then the object appears too faint.

Figure 9. Crystal block of the 2dF galaxy redshift survey [9], each point is a
3D galaxy position and as such the data preparation is trivial.

In the process of representing data using SSLE, the author
has developed algorithms to extract suitable point clouds from
various types of dataset, namely volumetric and polygonal. In
both cases the key is creating an appropriate density of dots,
dense enough so that the surfaces are clearly visible and not too
dense that cracking occurs. Perhaps surprisingly these models
can be created very quickly, within minutes, despite there being
perhaps millions of points. As such the author need now overly
concern themselves with the number of points but rather their
optimal deployment.
Two approaches have been explored for creating suitable
point clouds from volumetric data, the first is to create a point at
positions in the volume if the voxel value at that position lies
within some range, see figure 10 (left). Another approach is to
first create an isosurface, using marching cubes say, and then
polygonise that polygon model, see figure 10 (right). The direct
volume sampling is the easiest and works best when the
resolution of the volumetric data is a reasonable match to the
final point density in the crystal.
A number of options exist for creating a point cloud from a
polygonal dataset. Whichever is used one generally needs to
only add a point to the final point cloud if the point is at least
some minimum distance from any other point, this is to avoid
large connected bubbles and in the worse case internal cracking.
Candidate points can be added by considering the vertices, the
center of triangles, by sampling of the edges, or even sampling
the faces, see figure 11. The best method depends on the
characteristics of the triangles within the model. For example,
the triangles in meshes derived from marching cubes [10] tend
to be approximately equal size and high density in which case
sufficient point density may be achieved by simple considering
the vertices themselves. For other models there may be large
polygons which will need their surfaces subsampled. Another
approach is to contour the model along one or two axis planes
and sample points along those contour lines. As with surfaces
displayed on a computer display this often leads to natural
illustration of the local surface curvature.

Figure 10. Direct volumetric point cloud generation of an Egyptian mummy
(left), isosurface sampling of a CT scan of a human heart (right).

Figure 11. Sampling lines with defined dot spacing (top left), sampling planar
faces at vertices and optionally midpoints (top right), sampling planar faces at
predefined dot spacing (bottom left), sampling planar faces along contours
(bottom right).

V.

CONCLUSION

Presented here are three technologies that are more
commonly encountered in areas of merchandise and marketing
but which are suited to more serious applications, in particular,
the representation and visualisation of data from science and
mathematics. There are parallels here with the use of so called
game engines that can be used to create virtual environments
and deployed for equally serious applications.
All three technologies result in actual physical objects and
can be produced at relatively low cost making them suited to
use where more specialised digital displays or other hardware
would not be possible or would be prohibitively expensive. The
original application of these technologies for frivolous
merchandising can now be applied to more meaningful forms of
educational merchandise.
The applications, while using technologies many of the
public will have encountered, have not generally been applied
to the visualisation of scientific data and can therefore be
viewed as novel and thus give rise to an increased engagement.
This increased engagement has been shown to provide a
heightened learning experience for school age education.
Visualisation is generally performed using only the sense of
vision, the tactile aspect of the rapid prototypes and crystal
blocks utilises another of the human senses. The multimodel
aspects of printed 3D models has already proved to have benefit
in computational chemistry and microscopy where researchers
can explore the molecular structures with their joint
visual/tactile sense.

View publication stats

VI.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work was supported by iVEC through the use of
advanced computing resources located at The University of
Western Australia.
REFERENCES
[1]

Synthetic dynamic holograms. Web reference (Access 1 Feb 2015).
http://paulbourke.net/miscellaneous/hologram/
[2] Oster, Gerald: Optical Art, Applied Optics (1985) 4 (11): 1359–69.
doi:10.1364/AO.4.001359
[3] Shapeways: Online 3D printing bureau service. Web reference (Access 1
Feb 2015). http://shapeways.com/
[4] ObJet 3D printer.Web Reference (Access 1 Feb 2015).
http://www.stratasys.com/
[5] MakerBot desktop 3D printing. Web Reference (Access 1 Feb 2015).
http://www.makerbot.com/
[6] Zcorp (3dsystems) colour 3D printer. Web Reference (Access 1 Feb
2015). http://www.3dsystems.com/
[7] J. Shier and P.D.Bourke: An Algorithm for Random Fractal Filling of
Space, Computer Graphics Forum, The Eurographics Association and \&
John Wiley Sons Ltd. Vol. 32, Issue 8, pp. 89-97, December 2013.
[8] Crystal engraving hardware.Web reference (Access 1 Feb 2015).
http://www.hanslaser.net/product/
[9] D. S. Madgwick, E. Hawkins, O. Lahav, S. Maddox, P. Norberg, J.
Peacock, I. K. Baldry, C. M. Baugh, J. Bland-Hawthorn, T. Bridges, R.
Cannon, S. Cole, M. Colless, C. Collins, W. Couch, G. Dalton, R. De
Propris, S. P. Driver, G. Efstathiou, R. S. Ellis, C. S. Frenk, K.
Glazebrook, C. Jackson, I. Lewis, S. Lumsden, B. A. Peterson, W.
Sutherland, K. Taylor. The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey: galaxy
clustering per spectral type. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1-10 (2003).
[10] W. E. Lorensen, H. E. Cline: Marching Cubes: A high resolution 3D
surface construction algorithm. Computer Graphics, Vol. 21, Nr. 4, July
1987.

