Things of the Internet (ToI):
Physicalization of Notification Data
Kieran Woodward

Eiman Kanjo

Abstract

Nottingham Trent University

Nottingham Trent University

Nottingham, UK

Nottingham, UK
Eiman.kanjo@ntu.ac.uk

When it comes to attention and notification management,
most of the previous attempts to visualise notifications
and smartphone usage have focused on digital
representations on screens that are not fully embedded
in the users’ environment. Today, the constant
development in hardware and embedded systems
including mini displays, LEDs, actuators as well as digital
fabrication, have begun to provide new opportunities for
representing data physically in surrounding
environments. In this paper, we introduce a new way of
visualising notification data using physical
representations that are deeply integrated within the
physical space and everyday objects. Based on our
preliminary design and prototypes, we identify a variety
of design challenges for embedded data representation,
and suggest opportunities for future research.

Kieran.woodward@ntu.ac.uk

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or
a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
UbiComp/ISWC'18 Adjunct, October 8–12, 2018, Singapore, Singapore
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5966-5/18/10…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3267305.3274112

1228

Author Keywords
Data physicalization; Emotion Recognition; Notifications;
Smartphone overuse; Attention management solution;
smart home.

ACM Classification Keywords
Keywords J.4 Social and Behavioural Sciences.

Introduction
Notification and smartphone management have received
a considerable level of attention in the past few years,
with many interventions and solutions being proposed to
help attention management. Most of these attempts have
focused on smartphone applications that capture changes
in phone use and use AI algorithms to model user
attention levels or emotions [6, 9, 16].
This modelling capability enables the management of
interruptibility, which in turns tackles attachment to
smartphones and delivers attention management
solutions based on the user’s behaviour and interaction
patterns with their smartphone.
On the other hand, technologies such as the Internet of
Things (IoT) are often used to generate data that can
then be visualised on a computer or a portable device
with a screen. However, too much emphasis is put on the
sensing and movement capabilities of these devices and
less on shape-changing displays which utilise the latest
developments in actuation and lighting technologies to
physically represent data.

The idea is to utilise lighting and actuation techniques to
generate movement in shape-changing displays with
physically reconfigurable geometry.

SMART PHONE NOTIFICATION MANAGMENT
Problematic smartphone use can affect majority of the
population as many smartphone apps function as rewards
that can lead to a habitual checking behaviour [8]. This
habitual behaviour includes unintended consequences
such as continually unlocking a phone to check for new
notifications [18].
Also, research has shown a direct link between emotions
and the level of engagement with smartphone
notifications [10]. Recent research found that people with
a low level of education, and students, are more likely to
become addicted to their smartphones [11]. Thus, those
most prone to excessive smartphone use impacting daily
life are those aged between 16 and 24, who either have a
low level of education or are still studying.

By merging the main effective characteristics of the two
concepts together, we could develop an effective shapechanging interface to visualise and manage attachment
to smartphone notifications.

Problematic smartphone use is not just an important
issue because of the vast amount of people it can affect
but also because of the adversity and problems it can
cause. For example, addicted students are less likely to
achieve high grades [5]. As 16-24 year olds use their
phones the most this could have a major negative impact
on many students’ academic performance.

In this paper, we propose a new concept called “The
Things of the Internet”; a technique to represent
notification data in order to help manage attention and
reduce excessive smart phone usage while keeping the
user informed of their emotion in relation to their online
activities and notifications in a visual and artistic form.

It is not only psychological issues that can arise from
problematic smartphone overuse; it can also lead to
physical issues such as fatigue or lack of sleep [12].
Therefore, many attempts have been made to model and
organise notification delivery in order to manage
attention.
One attempt to manage notification delivery involved a
device capable of forwarding notifications to other smart

1229

devices such as a monitor or lights [17]. However, there
was a large focus on forwarding all notifications possibly
resulting in additional smartphone use as users are
repeatedly interrupted to be made aware of new
notifications.
Attention management solutions balance an individual’s
need for fewer disruptions while providing efficient
information delivery [2], which is what ToI provides.

THE THINGS OF THE INTERNET
Data physicalization is where a device’s geometry or
material properties encode data compared to traditional
visualisations that map data to pixels. Examples of
situated and embedded data representations have been
independently explored in a variety of research areas,
including information visualization, augmented reality,
and ubiquitous computing which help increase visual
realism.
Also, with the advancement of affective computing
research [7, 20], many innovative prototypes are
emerging. Lovers Cups [4] is one such example that
comprises of two light-up glasses that remotely activate
when a partner uses their cup to simulate drinking
together. Each person can see in their cup how much
liquid is in their partner’s cup, when they are drinking
and the side they are drinking from through visual
feedback showing communication can be extended to
daily interactions.
Several research prototypes have explored actuation
using electro-mechanical motors [13], Servomotor [19],
Shape-Memory Alloy (SMA) wires [14] and
electromagnets [15] but no research has been conducted
utilising this to physicalize smartphone use.

1230

SYSTEM DESIGN
We define the Things of the Internet for notification
management as follows:
1.
2.
3.

Receives stream of digital data from smartphone.
Relays information using some form of actuation,
lights, sound, and/or any other form of feedback.
Dynamically manages user attachment to
smartphones without extra disruptions.

Figure 1 shows the proposed framework for ToI including
how data will be wirelessly transmitted before being
processed on-device to produce varying shapes, sounds
and colours.

Figure 1. Overview of (ToI) system for Notification Awareness

ToI does present some design challenges, as the
technology must seamlessly blend in with other
household items. To accomplish this the technology
utilised must be small yet sufficiently powerful to handle
the processing of incoming data.
ToI enables individuals with smartphone dependency to
observe their mood visualised physically which could
increase their awareness of the time they spend and
consequences of their smartphone usage and its impact
on wellbeing. To realise our vision for ToI, we have
developed two preliminary prototypes that predict and

visualise mood using the emotion model developed in
[9]:
Prototype 1: Visualises the mood of a few individuals at
the same time (in this case three), each flowers in the
vase move up or down according to the mood of an
individual (see figure 2). To accomplish this data from
the users’ smartphones and wearables including
notification data, phone use and physiological data (if
present) is wirelessly transmitted to the prototype in
real-time. The data received is then processed using the
microcontroller powering the prototype; the happier the
user is perceived the higher the flower moves in the
vase.
This prototype does not provide large amounts of
information to the users such as whether they have
unread notifications but this makes the device
‘glanceable’. In addition, the ability for it to display data
from multiple users makes it ideal for families as it allows
parents to easily monitor the impact their children’s
smartphone use is having on their emotional wellbeing.

with different colours using a set of LEDs. These lines and
squares allow for a wide array of patterns to be
constructed all indicating different smartphone use and
emotions.
Research has shown informative art can be an
appropriate way to visualise data [3]. My painting shows
my stats [1] demonstrated this by having a painting
dynamically change in accordance with users’ physical
activity. This device was capable of conveying a large
amount of information in a glance, as this prototype
hopes to achieve.
While this prototype is capable of displaying more data
than prototype 1 allowing users to know the current state
of their smartphone and the impact it is having on their
emotions, it requires more attention to understand the
visual representations. This makes the design of this
prototype difficult, as the amount of information
displayed must be carefully balanced with its simplicity to
ensure it is effective.

This prototype possesses some design challenges, as it
may be difficult to notice slight height differences over
time making it hard to gain any meaningful insights.
Additionally, when used with families it may be difficult to
distinguish between the different flowers representing
different people.
Prototype 2: Physically visualises the mood of an
individual on a wall art frame for the individual and family
to see.
An actuated surface with lines and squares forms
patterns similar to the famous compositions shown in
figure 3. Each line has a motor that allows it to move
horizontally and vertically and the squares can be lit up

Figure 2. Overview of (TOI) protype 1.

1231

CONCLUSION

Figure 3. Left: Theo van Doesburg – Composition VII , 1917 /
Right: Piet Mondrian – Composition C (no.III), with Red, Yellow
and Blue, 1935. Both artists were a part of De Stijl movement in
the Netherlands.

The two prototypes discussed both enable users to
quickly glance at physical objects to understand how
their current smartphone use is affecting their emotional
state. By utilising common household items such as
flowers and wall art, these prototypes inconspicuously
help prevent the habitual checking of smartphones,
improving mood and reducing the possibility of users
becoming addicted to their smartphone.
In the future, we aim to evaluate these works based on
the simplicity of the displayed information and the
amount of information they manage to convey. Ideally,
devices should be able to display all vital information
including the emotional impact current smartphone use is
having in a simple glance.
This initial work on notification management is limited to
displaying the emotions of individuals to provoke
contemplation of excess smartphone use and its impact
on mood. Our intention for future work is to go beyond
displays to more effective changes in ambient settings in
order to promote behaviour change and ease attachment
to smartphones.

1232

ToI is an early and conceptual interactive prototype that
allows us to imagine and propose future interfaces. With
the development of inexpensive, lightweight, energyefficient actuator technologies we anticipate the
development of thin, fast and effective shaped displays.
These displays could be used every day as abstract and
computational geometric art to physically visualise the
dynamic flow of notifications, online activities and its
impact on emotional wellbeing in an adaptive and
personalised fashion. The next stages of this project will
be to deploy these prototypes and evaluate their
performance in real world settings. Also, we aim to go
beyond displays and visualisations to implement some
effective techniques to motivate users in changing their
behaviour and reducing smartphone overuse.

References
1.

Alexandra Voit, Miriam Greis, Dominik Weber,
Katharina Gönner, Isabella Kutger, and Albrecht
Schmidt. 2017. My painting shows my stats: towards
a personal colorful activity display. In Proceedings of
(MUM '17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 415-420.

2.

Anderson, Christoph, Isabel Fernanda Hübener, AnnKathrin Seipp, Sandra Ohly, Klaus David, Veljko
Pejovic “A Survey of Attention Management Systems
in Ubiquitous Computing Environments.” CoRR
abs/1806.06771 (2018).

3.

Chloe Fan, Jodi Forlizzi, and Anind K. Dey. 2012. A
spark of activity: exploring informative art as
visualization for physical activity. In Proceedings of
the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 81-84.

4.

Chung, H., Lee, C.-H. J., & Selker, T. (2006). Lover’s
cups. In CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’06 (p. 375).
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Hawi, N. S., & Samaha, M. (2016). To excel or not to
excel: Strong evidence on the adverse effect of
smartphone addiction on academic performance.
Computers and Education, 98, 81–89.
Kanjo, E., Kuss, D. J., & Ang, C. S. (2017). NotiMind:
Utilizing Responses to Smart Phone Notifications as
Affective Sensors. IEEE Access, 5, 22023–22035.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2755661
Kanjo, E., Younis, E. M. G., & Ang., C., (2018), Deep
Learning Analysis of Mobile Physiological,
Environmental and Location, Sensor Data for
Emotion Detection, Information Fusion Journal.
Kanjo, E., Younis, E.M.G. and Sherkat, N., 2018.
Towards unravelling the relationship between onbody, environmental and emotion data using sensor
information fusion approach. Information Fusion, 40,
pp. 18-31. ISSN 1566-2535
KUSS, D.J., HARKIN, L., KANJO, E. and BILLIEUX, J.,
2018. Problematic smartphone use: investigating
contemporary experiences using a convergent
design. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 15 (1), p. 142. ISSN
1661-7827

10. KUSS, D.J., KANJO, E., CROOK-RUMSEY, M.,
KIBOWSKI, F., A., 2017. Problematic mobile phone
use and smartphone addiction across generations:
the roles of psychopathological symptoms and
smartphone use. Journal of Technology in Behavioral
Science. ISSN 2366-5963.
11. Kwon, M., Kim, D.-J., Cho, H., and Yang, S., 2013.
The smartphone addiction scale: development and
validation of a short version for adolescents. PloS
one, 8 (12), e83558.
12. Lapointe, L., Boudreau-Pinsonneault, C., and Vaghefi,
I., 2013. Is Smartphone Usage Truly Smart? A
Qualitative Investigation of IT Addictive Behaviors.
In: 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. IEEE, 1063–1072.

13. Leithinger, D., Follmer, S., Olwal, A., Luescher, S.,
Hogge, A., Lee, J., and Ishii, H. (2013).
14. Nakatani, M., Kajimoto, H., Vlack, L., Sekiguchi, D.,
Kawakami, N., and Tachi, S. (2005). Control method
for a 3D form display with coil-type shape memory
alloy. In Proc. ICRA, 1332-1337.
15. Niiyama, R. and Kawaguchi, Y. (2008). Gemotion
Screen: A Generative, Emotional, Interactive 3D
Display. In Proc. ASIAGRAPH, 115-12.
16. Rapeepisarn, T., Tatiyanupanwong, S.,
Kornvisitvatin, B., and Tangsripairoj, S., 2016.
iRelief: An Android application for smartphone
syndrome prevention and treatment. In: 2016 Fifth
ICT International Student Project Conference (ICTISPC). IEEE, 121–124.
17. Thomas Kubitza, Alexandra Voit, Dominik Weber, and
Albrecht Schmidt. 2016. An IoT infrastructure for
ubiquitous notifications in intelligent living
environments. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
Ubicomp: Adjunct (UbiComp '16). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 1536-1541.
18. Van Deursen, A. J. A. M., Bolle, C. L., Hegner, S. M.,
& Kommers, P. A. M. (2015). Modeling habitual and
addictive smartphone behavior: The role of
smartphone usage types, emotional intelligence,
social stress, self-regulation, age, and gender.
Computers in Human Behavior, 45, 411–420.
19. Wagner, C. R., Lederman, S. J., and Howe, R. D.
(2002). A tactile shape display using RC
servomotors. HAPTICS, 354–355.
20. Woodward, K., Kanjo., E., EmoEcho: A tangible
interface to convey and communicate emotions, in:
UbiComp '18 Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct, ACM, 2018.

1233

