See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275347183

Patina Engraver: Visualizing Activity Logs as Patina in Fashionable Trackers
Conference Paper · April 2015
DOI: 10.1145/2702123.2702213

CITATIONS

READS

17

521

1 author:
Moon-Hwan Lee
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
17 PUBLICATIONS 61 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Industry Funded Projects View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Moon-Hwan Lee on 01 May 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

Patina Engraver: Visualizing Activity Logs as Patina
in Fashionable Trackers
Moon-Hwan Lee, Seijin Cha, Tek-Jin Nam
CIDR Lab, Department of Industrial Design, KAIST
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea
{moonhwan, sjcha, tjnam}@kaist.ac.kr
ABSTRACT

Despite technological improvements in commercial activity
trackers, little attention has been given to their emotional,
social, or fashion-related qualities, such as their visual
aesthetics and their relationship to self-expression and
social connection. As an alternative integrated approach
incorporating HCI, fashion, and product design, our project
made use of the characteristics of patina to improve activity
trackers as fashionable wearables. We developed the Patina
Engraving System, which engraves patina-like patterns on
an activity tracker according to a user’s activity logs. Using
a piercing technique, the patina of activity logs has been
made abstract, visually rich, gradually emerging, and
historically accumulated. During the field trial, we found
that the patina motivated the participants to increase
exercises for engraving aesthetic patinas. A tracker with
patina triggered spontaneous social interactions in face-toface situations. The participants also cherished the trackers
that held their own history. Based on the field trial, we
discuss design implications for utilizing patina in designing
future fashionable technologies.
Author Keywords

Activity tracker; patina; fashion; digital fabrication.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

Recently, there has been a proliferation of commercial
activity trackers for monitoring physical activity related to
health and wellbeing, including Jawbone UP, Fitbit, Misfit
Wearables, and others [23]. Most of the activity trackers
collect an activity log and help users reflect on their life by
visualizing the data in mobile or web applications. Related
to tracking devices, the field of HCI has mainly contributed
to practical issues such as how to improve sensing
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2015, April 18 - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702213

mechanisms and understand
methods [4, 5, 9, 26].

diverse

self-monitoring

However, one of the important aspects of activity trackers is
that they are personal fashion items that play a role in
personal identity, visual aesthetics, and social
communication that goes beyond technological features
such as usability and sensing accuracy etc. [2, 28, 32].
Though activity trackers have been improved as a personal
activity monitoring tool, it is necessary to consider issues
related to HCI’s third wave such as engaging user
experience and the meaningfulness of digital artifacts [8].
Considering the way that activity trackers are worn in
everyday life, it is especially important to investigate how
they can be improved as fashion items. Since the majority
of activity trackers are worn in a manner that makes them
visible, customers inevitably consider not only their
functionalities but also their visual appearance. Some
companies have started to raise their competitiveness by
cooperating with fashion brands because the technological
aspects of trackers have become otherwise equivalent in the
market [11].
As an alternative design approach to activity trackers, we
focused on the intersection of HCI and fashionable product
design. In particular, we were interested in the concept of
patina in activity trackers. Figuratively, patina refers to any
fading, darkening, or other sign of age that is felt to be
natural and/or unavoidable [18]. It is known that artists and
designers often deliberately use patina as a design resource
for constructing aesthetic properties, lending credibility to
an object or bestowing a “warm” feeling through art or
product design [6, 37]. For similar purposes, we applied the
concept of patina for designing activity tracking systems to
improve the tracking experience of those who wear trackers
to monitor activity.
In this paper, we present the Patina Engraving System
(Patina Engraver and Patina Tracker), which engraves
patina-like patterns on the wristband of activity trackers and
thereby visualizes users’ accumulated activity logs.
Accordingly, the appearance of the trackers changes along
with the users’ tracking experience. Using the system, we
conducted a field trial with 8 participants for 5 weeks to
learn how the system was used in their lives.
This paper makes several contributions. First, it details a
novel activity log visualization technique by applying the
concept of patina. The Patina Engraving System is

1173

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

proposed as an example of an alternative approach to
aesthetically represent an activity tracker. The process and
rationale behind the system design are presented as design
knowledge. The results of the field trial improve our
understanding as to whether patina-like engraving enriches
the tracking experience. Finally, it guides the design of
future fashionable products with patina by suggesting
design issues and opportunities.
BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK

This work is related to the research topics at the intersection
of personal informatics and fashionable wearables.
Regarding personal informatics, works on quantified-self
with activity tracking and visualization of activity logs are
particularly relevant. Diverse development cases also exist
in the field of personalized activity tracking in fashionable
wearables.
Quantified-self: General Use of Activity Trackers

The area of quantified-self movement has developed
guidelines as to how to collect and use activity data, often
from trackers and tracking applications [4, 5, 24, 25]. For
instance, Rooksby et al. discussed various styles of tracking,
including goal driven tracking and documentary tracking
[30]. Li et al. found six kinds of questions that people ask
about their data: Status, History, Goals, Discrepancies,
Context, and Factors [25]. They also found that certain
kinds of questions are more important depending on the
phases of reflection: Discovery and Maintenance. The
previous work in this domain contributed to our
understanding of the practices of tracking systems. It
emphasized the necessity of producing more than
technological improvements in activity tracking, the
importance of considering the emotional aspects of tracking,
and the notion of developing social tracking beyond the
ability to publish data to social networks [30]. Nevertheless,
relatively little attention was paid to a wearable tracker.
Specifically, this study takes a design approach to activity
trackers as a fashionable item and attempts to improve their
emotional and social qualities.
Visualization of Activity Logs: From Virtual Medium to
Physical Medium

For supporting effective self-monitoring and motivating
users to partake in physical activity, visualization has been
a key issue in personal informatics. The majority of
commercial trackers mainly target the virtual medium using
numbers, graphs, and metaphors [10, 31]. Numbers and
graphs take up little screen space and can be easy to
interpret, however there can be usability and interpretation
issues when it comes to larger data sets [36]. Some
researchers suggested using virtual metaphors such as
interactive art displays [9] or growing a pet according to the
activity log [26]. Their research shows that this type of
visualization can be engaging and fun.

Beyond the virtual medium, research has been carried out
relating to the use of the physical medium for visualizing
physiological and activity logs. For instance, Requena

presented research projects to fabricate the physical
medium as jewelry based on physiological data [29].
Related to the physical representation of activity logs, Khot
et al. developed SweatAtoms, which transforms the
physical activity data into 3D printed artifacts [21]. They
found that a physical medium made people more conscious
of their involvement in physical activity. Although the
previous work showed the potential for utilizing a physical
medium, there are limitations to deploying this approach in
activity trackers and tracking systems. As explained in Khot
et al.’s research [21], the building process using a 3D
printer is a laborious and time-intensive process that is
uncomfortable for general users. Additionally, because the
physical object represents just one moment of tracking,
users need to generate a number of objects for long-term
activity logging.
In our study, we tried to exploit the advantages of the
physical medium and reduce the burden of the building
process. In particular, our work differs from previous
research in that we exploited patina as a physical medium to
visualize activity logs just as artists deliberately add patina
for constructing aesthetic properties and simulating
antiquity in newly-made objects.
Activity Trackers as Fashionable Wearables

The term fashionable wearables is used to refer to designed
garments or accessories that combine aesthetics and style
with functional technologies [32]. The embedding of
electronics into fashion items has been investigated in
research for many years, and there are even several
commercial cases for supporting physical activity. Most of
them mainly sense and transmit the wearer’s physiological
and movement data in real-time [1, 35]. As a research
prototype, Social Fabric Fitness provides a glanceable
shared screen on the back of a runners’ shirt to increase
awareness of group fitness performance [27]. Though
several wearable devices have been designed to sense and
monitor physical activity, they have been less than
satisfactory on the fashion front. Like other wearable
devices, activity trackers are generally designed as plain
black (or single color) wristbands and look more like digital
watch straps. To improve the quality of trackers as fashion
accessories, some fitness tracker companies collaborated
with luxury fashion brands [11]. Nevertheless, while the
current design approach might improve trackers’ visual
appearance when they are worn, the design approach
focusing on the visual appearance has little relationship
with the main function of trackers such as activity tracking
and supporting activity monitoring. Additionally, given the
popularization of digital fabrication in the HCI field [20, 21,
36], there is now the potential to strengthen the diverse
roles of a fashion item by allowing it to express a user’s
personal identity or improve social connections as well as
visual aesthetics.
These cases illustrate the need for an alternative design
approach that integrates activity log visualization in the area

1174

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

of personal informatics with an understanding of activity
trackers as fashionable wearables in the fashion and product
design field. This integration is important not only for
improving users’ physical activity, but also for supporting
and engaging user experience in the long-term. To exceed
the current design approach, which focuses on visual
aesthetics, this research explored a design approach that
utilizes activity logs for making patina-like patterns.
DESIGN EXPLORATION

We exploited the concept of patina for visualizing activity
logs physically and cumulatively. In what follows, we
explain the characteristics of patina, our design exploration,
and the rationale behind our decisions relative to the
materials and technique used to create patina.

systems by visualizing activity data in the form of patina
and applying the patina to tracking devices and systems.
Technique and Material for Engraving Patina

With consideration given to the characteristics of patina, we
tested visualization techniques in a physical medium and
materials to simulate patina. In particular, inspired by
stippling [34] and tattooing, we explored a piercing
technique that inserts a needle into the surface, which is
attached to an oscillating unit (solenoid in our case). As the
unit rapidly and repeatedly drives the needles in and out of
the surface, the needles leave small dots on the surface.

Visualization of Activity Logs in the Form of Patina

The word patina refers to a thin layer that forms variously
on the surface of stone, on metals, and on wooden furniture
(the sheen produced by age, wear, and polishing). It can
also refer to any change a surface acquires through age and
exposure [18]. Patina has been used to increase the value of
artifacts in art and design. Today, the terms patina and
patination are used in a broader sense, denoting techniques
for applying processes connected with the ageing of the
surfaces of works of art or the accumulated changes in
surface texture and color that result from an object’s normal
use. Designers have intentionally used some materials on
the surface of objects to leave patina that gives a sense of
history [14, 17]. Specifically, according to literature on art
and culture, the characteristics of patina can be classified as
below [5, 18, 37]:
• Abstract: Patina provides information in ambiguous
ways. The abstract and subtle shape of patina may
stimulate users’ reflection.
• Visually rich: Patina is often used to make an object look
aesthetically pleasing. It is often expressed on the surface
of the object by changing color or texture as shown in a
leather product.
• Gradually emerging (on a physically limited surface):
Patina is created gradually in a limited space on a surface.
In the long term, the patina emerges, and its expression
becomes thicker and richer.
• Historically accumulated: Patina shows the past history
of an object’s use. People may leave the patina
intentionally to mark an event or person. Or the patina
may be unintentionally generated while the object is
touched or exposed to the environment.
The characteristics of patina have already been applied in
the art and design area. Some cases exist in applications of
graphical interfaces that metaphorically exploit patina to
provide information about user history in the HCI area [19,
33]. Few cases exist for improving the quality of a digital
device. We tried to utilize physical patina in tracking

Figure 1. Material and technique for engraving patina

By exploring and comparing other fabrication techniques
such as CNC milling, laser cutting, and 3D printing, we
found the piercing technique has several advantages for
visualizing patina. First, its expression is relatively
noticeable in visual and tactile ways like the cases of tattoo
or stippling arts. Second, it expresses patina gradually on a
physically limited surface. Since CNC milling and laser
cutting takes the surface away, and 3D printing makes the
surface bigger, there are limits to the amount of patina that
can be expressed on the same surface. On the contrary,
piercing can express detailed and gradual traces on a
limited surface. Third, the set-up and clean-up process of a
piercing device is relatively convenient. CNC milling and
laser cutting create lots of dust and they are risky for
general customers. 3D printing takes a long time to
construct objects and requires inserting materials
continuously.
Throughout the process of exploring materials to pierce,
such as a silicone pad, leather, etc., we developed material
to maximize the visual and tactile effectiveness of the
patina produced by the piercing technique (Figure 1.a). The
developed material consists of three layers. The first layer
at the bottom is a silicone pad (1mm). On the silicone pad, a
brightly colored PVC sheet (125 µm) is attached. Then, as a
third layer, a dark paint is evenly spread on the PVC sheet.
When the needle reaches the painted surface, the painted
layer is stripped down. This causes the bright sheet to stand
out against the dark painted layer, making the pattern both
visually and tactually vivid (Figure 1.b).

1175

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

Visual Patterns of Patina

We also explored visual patterns for representing patina that
reinforce characteristics such as abstract, visually rich,
gradually emerging, and historically accumulated. Since
the abstract and visually rich aspects are satisfied by the
allocation of pierced dots while the historical aspect is
satisfied by using users’ activity data, we focused more on
the aspect of gradualness on a physically limited surface.
To visualize patina on a physical surface, we applied
stippling, a technique that creates a pattern simulating
varying degrees of solidity or shading using small dots [34].
Throughout the exploration, we found that the piercing
mechanism could be applied in three ways to our material
to express the characteristics of gradualness and historicity
(Figure 2). Although other types of visual patterns could be
used to express patina, we selected the face, line, and fractal
types that can be modified widely as basic components of
visual patterns. These basic visualizing types were applied
in our prototypes.

Figure 3. Patina Tracker

Figure 2. Visual patterns of patina: (a) Stippled face type, (b)
Stippled line type, (c) Fractal type.

• Stippled face type: By filling a face with dots, it is
possible to vary the color of the face.
• Stippled line type: By filling a line with dots, it is
possible to make the line thicker and clearer.
• Fractal type: This type is related to a combination of
lines. We especially utilized a fractal shape that is
infinitely self-similar, iterated, and detailed theoretically.
PATINA ENGRAVING SYSTEM

Through the exploration of a piercing technique and
material and visual patterns, we developed a prototype of
the Patina Engraving System consisting of the Patina
Tracker and the Patina Engraver.
Hardware of Patina Tracker and Patina Engraver

The Patina Tracker uses the three-layered material we
developed in the wristband part (Figure 3). To fasten the
band, magnets were attached inside at both ends. As a
tracking sensor, we utilized the sensor part of Fitbit Flex
[10], which was embedded at the center of the wristband.
Additionally, an RFID tag was attached inside the band to
identify the participant’s ID and load their activity logs.

Figure 4. Patina Engraver

The Patina Engraver mainly consists of two stepper motors
and a piercing unit (solenoid with a needle) (Figure 4). The
piercing unit is moved in the XY-plane by two stepper
motors. The piercing unit drives the needles up-down by the
solenoid with the speed of 3-5 times per second. The
diameter of the needle in the piercing unit was 0.35mm.
During our exploration, it is found that the piercing speed
and resolution vary depending on the speed of motors and
the needle size. The rack at the bottom is used to place a
tracker for engraving. When a tracker is put on the rack,
magnets under the rack hold the tracker while it is engraved.
At the same time, the RFID reader under the rack identifies
whose tracker it is.
Software of Patina Engraving System

In this system, users’ activity logs are periodically saved to
the local computer by accessing their Fitbit account (Figure
5). If the Patina Tracker is placed on the Patina Engraver,
the engraver identifies the user and loads his/her activity
logs on the local computer using RFID. Then, the local

1176

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

computer analyzes the activity logs and sends pattern codes
to the Arduino board in the Patina Engraver. The engraver
moves the stepper motors and the piercing unit based on
pre-defined pattern types and the pattern codes from the
local computer.

noise on the lines. Specifically, when the active times are
long, the noise value becomes smaller to engrave a more
clear and vivid line. When the active times are short, the
dots are engraved sporadically with bigger noise values
along with diagonal lines.
• Zone-2. In this zone, calories per week are mapped to the
length of each zigzag line. From the left to the right, the
length of a line indicates the amount of activity calories
from Monday to Sunday. Due to the narrow space, the
stipple line type was used for engraving.
• Zone-3. Like Zone-2, we mapped time in bed to each
line. To magnify the differences among days, patina lines
were engraved when the time in bed is in the range of
240–540 minutes.

Figure 5. System overview
Patterns on Patina Tracker

The overall layout of the patina patterns on an activity
tracker was decided through several phases of exploration.
Firstly, we selected (i) the types of activity logs as the
source data for engraving patina. Among diverse types of
activity logs, we chose steps, active time (minute), activity
calories, time in bed (minute), and total walking distance
(kilometer) that people generally want to know when using
tracking systems. Then, we considered (ii) shapes for each
activity log such as zigzag, rectangle etc., (iii) visual
patterns for engraving patina in the limited space (stippled
face type, stippled line type, fractal type), and (iv) physical
location on the surface of trackers. The pattern layout on an
activity tracker was evaluated by noticeability, possible
number of engravings, and visual aesthetics. Finally, each
source data was mapped onto four zones (Figure 6).

• Zone-4. In this zone, we mapped total walking distance
using the fractal type to show distinct improvement. We
divided total distance into 3 levels (lv.1: 0–20km, lv.2:
20–40km, lv.3: 40–60km). When total distance reaches a
certain level, a more detailed fractal structure is drawn in
three phases.
In the Patina Engraving System, the entire engraving
process took about 5–10 minutes depending on the
participants’ activity logs.
FIELD TRIAL

We conducted an “in the wild” study [3] to understand the
impacts of visualizing activity logs using patina not only on
functional aspects, but also on the emotional and social
aspects of the tracker and tracking experience. When
participants used the Patina Engraving System, we expected
that a certain amount of time would be needed for them to
grow accustomed to using the new device. We also
expected to find various roles of the patina engraving
process and the trackers besides the natural uses. Therefore,
we installed the Patina Engraver and Tracker in a natural
environment for 8 participants for 5 weeks. The sample size
and the length of the field trial were determined from a
previous study [3] that discussed field trial methods. Given
the exploratory nature of our design work, we focused on
gathering a rich set of opinions rather than quantitative
findings. As such, our work can be characterized as a form
of cultural probing [16] and an “in the wild” study that aims
to encourage reflective thinking about a system.
Participants

Figure 6. Designed patterns on Patina Tracker

• Zone-1. In this zone, average steps and active times per
day are mapped to the zigzag line and engraved in the
stippled face type to cover the middle surface of a
tracker. Since this zone is most conspicuous when the
tracker is worn, it was chosen as the area to receive steps
and active times as source data. In detail, steps are
mapped by the number of diagonal lines. Considering the
length of the tracker and the notion that 10,000 steps a
day is normal, we decided to map 1000 steps as one
diagonal line. Then active times are used to define the

We contacted sports clubs to recruit a group of participants
because we expected that they would be interested in
exercising and activity tracking and would have a close
relationship with each other. As recommended from a
previous study [15], the intimate relations among
participants at the same club could be a stimulus to
expressing their opinions and providing a greater depth of
understanding about the field context. Eventually, eight
participants from the same sports club (a badminton club)
were recruited for our study. There were 5 male and 3
female participants with ages varying from 22 to 28 years

1177

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

(M = 24.1, SD = 2.2). All participants played badminton
more than twice a week together and had close relationships.
Three of the participants partook regularly in other sports
such as walking, football, or golf. Participants’ past
experience of using trackers was also considered in the
recruitment phase. Three participants had an experience of
using trackers for about 1 month (M4: Misfit Shine, F1:
Galaxy Gear Fit, F2: sleep tracking application). We
expected that the past experience of using trackers would be
useful for eliciting the potential value of our system.
Throughout the paper we refer to each participant by sex
and the week of the interview session (e.g. M5, week 3).
Method

During the field trial, the Patina Engraver and Trackers
were used for 5 weeks. To lessen the participants’ burden
and observe how the system pervaded their normal lives,
the Patina Engraver was installed in a building which all
participants could reach within 10 minutes by foot; it was
also close to the gym where the participants play badminton.
After starting the study, participants were asked to set up
their trackers and applications. They then created a Fitbit
account with an ID and password we assigned them. Using
them, we could access participants’ raw activity logs.
Participants were allowed to sync their logs as desired using
a personal computer or mobile phone.
During the first week, participants wore the tracker without
engraving patterns. Participants adapted to the tracking
process and this period reduced the novelty effect of
tracking itself. The first week’s interviews included
questions related to their biographies (ordinary practice of
exercise and sleeping).

trackers and their activity logs were used to identify the
detailed situations users mentioned in their interviews. All
interviews, for a total of 720 minutes, were audio recorded
and transcribed. Interview transcription and contextual use
data, including activity data and photos of participants’
trackers, were categorized by our research team through
iterative analytic induction. During the analysis, we
considered the novelty effects and found unexpected uses
and unreported results from the lead participant by referring
to existing research [3].
FINDINGS

Overall, participants were receptive to the idea of engraving
patina and were engaged with using their Patina Trackers
and Engraver. Table 1 shows how the trackers were used
for 5 weeks. The activity logs varied depending on each
participant’s tracking style. We also found that participants
frequently forgot sleep recording, which required a mode
change in the tracker. However, in general, participant’s
average amount of steps, active time, active calories, and
time in bed tended to decrease after the 1st week as the
tracking system became ordinary to them. From the weekly
interviews, we also confirmed that participants become
familiar with activity trackers: “Though it was interesting
to monitor my data at first, I got used to it after using the
tracker several times. Now I am monitoring it less
frequently than the 1st week” (M3, week 2).
Steps

per day

Active
Time (min.)
per day

During the 2nd to 4th week, the participants visited us for
interviews and used the Patina Engraver twice a week.
Depending on their schedules, we met with them at
intervals of 3–5 days. Among the two meetings per week,
one was only for engraving and the other was for interview
and engraving together. The interviews were conducted
with a group of two or three participants. Since they had
close relationships and attended the same sports club, they
could discuss their experience spontaneously [15]. During
the interview, we asked questions relating to the role of the
patina and the functional, emotional, and social aspects of
the Patina Engraving System. About the social impact, we
asked how our system was used among acquainted and nonacquainted people.
In the 5th week, we stopped engraving tasks and participants
wore a normal Fitbit tracker. In the post-use interviews, we
asked what they missed the most while using the Patina
Engraving System and the impacts of the engraving system
compared to normal trackers. In addition, we asked them
about the possibility of using patina in other contexts.
Data Collection and Analysis Method

We mainly analyzed the results based on the weekly and
post-use interviews. The weekly photos of participants’

Week 1

Week 2

Week 3

Week 4

8816.3

8688.5

7677.4

9085.8

SD = 3889.1

81.2

SD = 33

Active
Calories

SD = 327.2

Time in
Bed (min.)

SD = 110.7

per day

per day

776.4
322.4

SD = 3036.8

63.5

SD = 40.1

779.2

SD = 319.7

290.2

SD = 156.8

SD = 2660.6

59.1

SD = 20.9

718.6

SD = 263.7

210.8

SD = 119.7

SD = 3058.5

66.6

SD = 21

829.9

SD = 246.1

216.8

SD = 116.1

Week 5

6056.2

SD = 2751

52.3

SD = 23

582.4

SD = 371.2

243.3

SD = 147.2

Table 1. Average activity logs during 5 weeks

Figure 7. Participants’ Patina Trackers at 3rd week (after
engraving 3 times)

Meanwhile, we could observe that participants’ Patina
Trackers became varied after 5–6 times of engraving

1178

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

(Figure 7). For instance, while the trackers of F1 and M1
were engraved with thicker patina patterns, those of M3 and
M4 had less clear patina due to their relatively low level of
activity. Likewise all participants’ trackers became
distinguishable. Next, we explain the functional, emotional,
social impacts of patina engraving on the tracking
experience and the perception of trackers as fashionable
wearables.
Wondering about What Patina Means and Past Activities

One common feature of commercial trackers is to provide
an activity log using mobile and web applications. Unlike
applications that show prompt changes in physical activity,
the abstract and historical aspect of patina on the trackers
provided summarized information about past activities in a
subtle way. After patina was engraved on the tracker,
participants became curious about which parts of the tracker
had changed and what kind of new patina patterns had
appeared. They then tried to associate the patina with their
past activities using mobile phones in the interview
sessions: “(While looking at Fitbit app) Maybe this part is
vacant because I did not sleep enough for working
overtime” (F2, week 2).
During the interviews in the 4–5th weeks, several
participants mentioned that they checked their activity
through the mobile app or website less frequently and their
activity checking period became longer as they got used to
tracking. In this situation, the patina tracker became a
supplement for providing summarized information: “It
became bothersome to check my activity log in mobile app.
In that sense, I like this patina because it expresses
approximate lifestyle” (M3, week3), “Though it is difficult
to figure out accurate information, this provides indirect
proof of my activity like a growth ring” (F1, week 3).
Several participants said they did not need to check detailed
information through the app or web because they were able
to expect a general tendency even without them. For them,
patina was enough for checking their general life cycle.
Meanwhile, some participants mentioned the limits of
patina for delivering information. Although patina could
deliver information about how their activities had changed,
they mention that it was not suitable for informing them
about detailed changes such as differences among days or
weeks: “Because it is hard to figure out the difference as
more and more patina is accumulated, it will be not good to
understand my activities per day” (F2, week 2).
Feeling Pressure for Engraving Aesthetic Patina

The patina and patina engraving put persistent pressure on
participants to exercise and wear a tracker. We observed
that participants made an effort to engrave more aesthetic
and meaningful patina patterns. In our system, as steps and
active times increase, the zigzag shape in Zone-1 is
engraved more thickly in the middle of the tracker and
participants considered this to be more aesthetically
pleasing (Figure 6, 7). Consequently, participants were
motivated to increase their exercise. Though the response

about ugliness was not intentional, it seemed because vivid
and flawless patterns are generally regarded as beautiful in
commercial digital products. Additionally, since the patina
was indelible and the engraving affected the entire
aesthetics of the tracker, participants were conscious about
this and mentioned that they tried to exercise more in their
daily life, walking a longer route or using stairs, etc. In the
case of F1, she thought her patina was ugly due to her short
exercising times after the 1st patina engraving. During the
next week, she mentioned that she tried to work out harder
to create a more beautiful patina at the next engraving:
“Because this tracker is directly affected by my loose
activity and showing it physically, it makes me regret my
insufficient exercising” (F1, week 3).
While the physical presence of patina put psychological
pressure on the participants, patina engraving could also be
regarded as a reward for their activities. Some participants
felt fulfillment when they looked at their patinaaccumulated trackers during the three weeks of patina
engraving. The fact that the patina resulted from their
physical activities was especially fulfilling, as they felt that
the aesthetically-evolving patina was a reward for their
efforts: “If I run longer, the patina will increase and
become thicker, which make me feel proud of my efforts”
(M3, week 2), “What about using this system in the gym? If
people engrave patina after working out for a week, they
would feel rewarded” (F2, week 3).
Furthermore, we found that the patina engraving affected
tracker wearing habits as well. Participants were concerned
about the fact that if they did not wear their trackers
constantly, the patina would be irrelevant to their general
lifestyle: “Compared to other tracking devices, I tried
harder to wear it regularly. This was because it is better to
make patina which correspond to me” (M4, week 2).
Having Spontaneous Co-located Interaction

Existing tracking systems support online communication by
posting an activity log in social network services, showing a
friend’s activity log, and providing chatting functions, etc.
However, in our study these functions were used less
frequently at the end of the study compared to the 1st week.
Most participants felt reluctant to reveal their activity
history to the public. For them, it felt like vanity. Also, as
they were already using other chatting platforms, they did
not require that in our tracking application. Our system is
different to the prevalent systems in that activity
information was shown in the physical world without using
a virtual medium. Using this system, participants were able
to reveal their activity history quietly in the physical world.
Accordingly, we observed that spontaneous interactions
emerged in face-to-face situations.
Sharing and Comparing within the Participant Group

Within the participant group, which met frequently in daily
life, the physical presence of patina allowed participants to
access each other’s activity logs easily. They said that the
Patina Tracker was suitable for situations in which they

1179

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

exercised with sports club members in the gym without
using mobile phones for accessing their activity log.
Though the abstract shape of patina made it difficult to
recognize details at a glance, it induced them to compare
other participants’ patina with their own. F1, F2, and M4
mentioned that they envied M1’s tracker and were
motivated and inspired by it. “When we met in the sport
club in the 2nd week, I found that Dave (M1)’s tracker was
prettier than mine. And I wanted to make mine like his” (F1,
week 2). In this way, participants shared other participants’
information about activities in physical spaces.
Getting Others’ Attention & Conversing about Patina

Besides the social impact of patina within the participant
group, we also observed social impacts on people who do
not know the meaning of patina. For them, the Patina
Trackers attracted attention due to the evolving nature of
the accessory and the different patina that emerged
periodically, thus differentiating them from static
accessories. M1 said that the normal trackers, which were
worn during the 1st week before the patina engraving, also
attracted others attention. However, he said that in the case
of the normal trackers he could only talk about the
functional features of the trackers rather than personal
activities related to tracking. On the other hand, the Patina
Tracker with accumulated patina enabled communication
about stories behind the patina and their physical activities
among the people who did not know what the patina meant.
In particular, participants could tell personal stories of
events, growth, and achievement while exercising or
sleeping: “My colleagues ask me why the patina changed.
Then I explained about each patina by associating the
patina pattern with my daily activities” (M1, week 2).
In addition, they mentioned that the abstract shape of the
patina had the advantage of hiding private information from
strangers: “For people who do not know this tracker, they
will consider it as just a wristband. Rather than engraving
numbers or graphs, this abstract shape of patina is proper
not to give details of my life” (M4, week 4). They said they
would not want to disclose their activity log to strangers.
Crafting a Symbolic Object that Holds One’s Own History

All of the participants enjoyed the patina engraving process.
Compared to normal tracking services, they said the
engraving provided a fun experience. By actually allowing
participants to engage with the patina engraving process, it
promoted a sense of engagement: “I think this engraving is
similar to stitching-up in the sense that the patina emerges
as I walk more” (F1, week 4).
However, we observed that their interest in engraving faded
over time, whereas their interest in the trackers lasted
longer. In the interviews during the 1st week before the
patina engraving, many said they would cherish their digital
log more than the tracking devices. Nevertheless, through
the patina engraving, they began to feel attachment toward
the trackers, which contained personalized patina patterns
and unique appearances. Accordingly, participants

considered the Patina Trackers symbolic objects more than
just a pedometer: “If this tracker is lost and I have to get a
new one without my patina, I would feel sorry about that”
(M5, week 4).
Meaningful attachment can emerge through the process of
self-extension, where someone attributes important aspects
of his or her self to an object [22]. In this system, the
process of patina engraving helped users customize the
tracker based on their activity log, which led to users
symbolically extending themselves into the tracker and
constructing autobiographical values: “It (patina) is like my
fingerprint. It is special in the fact that it shows who I am”
(M2, week 4), “While patina make my tracker prettier, at
the same time it strengthens symbolic meanings that I am
training hard or living life to the full” (F3, week 3).
DISCUSSION
Design Implications for Fashionable Trackers Using Patina

All fashionable items have physical, psychological, and
social functions [2]. As found in our study, while
aesthetically pleasing visual appearance is an integral part
of fashionable trackers, it is also important to consider its
psychological and social impacts, including self-expression,
communication in social groups, and user experience
around the trackers. In this section, we discuss research and
design implications to improve the use of patina for making
fashionable activity trackers.
Modifying Patina for Personally Meaningful Trackers

In our studies, participants liked the patina engraving
process that customized a tracker based on their activity log,
and they agreed that the patina contributed to making the
tracker personally valuable. In the interviews during the 5th
week, we discussed the further possibility of improving the
current system to make a more meaningful tracker.
First, the selection of personally interesting types among
diverse activity logs might contribute to making
personalized trackers. For instance, M3 paid more attention
to logs about sleep cycle, while F1 was interested in her
sedentary time. Also, interpreting activity logs according to
users’ different lifestyles may create more meaningful
trackers. In our prototype system, longer or thicker patina
patterns were engraved in proportion to the absolute value
of the activity logs (steps, active time, calories, time in bed).
However, the same activity logs can be interpreted
differently to provide meaningful information. For example,
F3 wanted to engrave patina based only on the log of a
specific day of the week when she took exercise regularly.
If users are able to set the scope of the activity log—
specific days, time slots per day, etc.—and the system
utilized these to engrave patina, the tracker with patina
patterns may be able to show more personal stories about
their lives and deliver more useful information.
Moreover, since people have different goals when it comes
to activity tracking, the patina might need to be engraved
differently to meet their needs. For some users, walking

1180

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

10,000 steps per day might be enough, whereas for others it
might be insufficient. If the patina is engraved in proportion
to the individual goals users set, the users are more likely to
feel fulfilled or reflect on their lack of activities.
Using Patina for Sustained Engagement with Activity Trackers

Since activity trackers are used over a long period,
designing a strategy to ensure sustained engagement is the
key to their success. According to Fogg, a user needs to
experience a feeling of progress toward defined goals to
achieve sustained engagement in activity trackers [12, 13].
He mentioned that the success from achieving several
smaller goals provides the positive momentum necessary
for achieving bigger goals. In that sense, though our Patina
Trackers could summarize how participants’ activities
changed over time, they had limitations regarding their
ability to maintain users’ interests and show their progress.
Thus, it is necessary to consider ways of utilizing patina to
motivate users in the long term. During the interviews, one
of the frequently mentioned solutions for sustained use of
activity trackers was to strengthen the impact of patina as a
reward for completing small goals. For instance, it would
be possible to engrave patina in special shapes when
achieving a 100 km distance or accomplishing 20,000 steps
in a day. M5 said that patina might be engraved in a way
that a specific image becomes clearer gradually, which
might provide a feeling of completion in the end. In this
way, people would be able to gain the momentum necessary
to progress. Thus, in future work, it is necessary to
investigate whether the patina engraving as a reward can
support sustained engagement in the trackers.
Adjusting Social Translucence of Patina

Erickson and Kellogg argued that social translucence is
necessary in the digital domain [7]. As translucent property
in the physical world supports graceful human-human
communication in face-to-face situations, socially
translucent systems can make users structure social
interaction with each other and carry on coherent
discussions. They worried that neither of these dimensions
of social translucence are a given in the digital domain. In
that sense, our system supported social translucence by
engraving physical patina based on a digital activity log. By
allowing users to see each other’s trackers and their
engraved patina and make inferences about their physical
activities, the system extended the space of social
interaction from the digital environment into the physical
environment.
Considering the social translucence of the Patina Tracker
and its effect, we could find further opportunities to develop
the Patina Engraving System focusing on co-located
physical activity. One of the significant qualities of the
Patina Tracker is its social communication in physical space.
During the last interview about the improvement of our
system, several comments related to the use of the tracker
for a specific group of users. For instance, M4 and M5
mentioned the patina could be engraved using both group

and individual data—for example, the amount of time they
exercise together or a comparison of the value of the
group’s activity level with that of the individual etc.
Likewise, if we use this system for specific group activities,
the patina on trackers may act as an emblem of the group
and accordingly may strengthen peer relations and support
sustained group activities.
However, it is necessary to continue exploring suitable
types of information the patina can provide as well as the
degree of social translucence. In our study, the Patina
Engraving System visualized steps, active time, activity
calories, and time in bed into the abstract shape of patina.
Though the participants mentioned that the visualization in
our study was fine to show to the public, they said that they
would have hated it if the visualization showed details such
as exact times. For example, if the tracker is too obvious, a
user might feel shame about his or her lack of exercise and
might worry about privacy. Since the patina would be
readable for everyone including strangers, this highlights
the need to tailor the types of information the patina
provides, as well as the level of translucence based on the
sensibilities and privacy concerns of the user.
Applying Patina to Other Contexts

Participants gave several ideas about the use of patina in
devices other than activity trackers. They suggested that the
patina might be helpful to achieve general health related
goals like losing weight, rehabilitation exercises, or quitting
smoking. M5 mentioned that people might feel a burden by
exposing their smoking data to others by engraving patina
on a Zippo lighter. He expected that other people would be
interested in the evolving patina and support not smoking.
Likewise, in future work we need to explore further
whether the engraving of patina based on health relevant
data can motivate people to achieve diverse health related
goals and help them change their behaviors in the long term.
Also, we see opportunities for applying patina in other
contexts. For instance, M3 said that it might be good to
engrave patina on a credit card to warn card holders about
excessive consumption. He said the patina on the credit
card might force him to reflect on his spending habits. F2
mentioned that she wanted to leave physical patina on her
radio that shows favorite channels. Her idea was that patina
could accumulate around the tuning dial as the user
frequently tunes into favorite stations. As mentioned by the
participants, our design approach to combining patina with
data about a user’s history can be applied generally in
product and interaction design. However, since the way of
using various devices, users’ needs, and the types of
logging data differ among several cases, further research
needs to be carried out to explore how patina can be applied
in general interactive product design.
CONCLUSION

Our motivation for conducting this study was to make
fashionable activity trackers that generate an engaging
experience. Thus, in this paper, we have presented a new

1181

I Like What I See - Interface Aesthetics

CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea

design approach for activity trackers by visualizing activity
logs in the form of patina. Also, with the deployment of the
Patina Engraving System through an “in the wild” study,
we explored how participants’ activity tracking experience
could be affected through patina engraving. We expect this
research to inspire designs for diverse tracking devices and
services, as well as general fashion and product designs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This research was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean
Government (NRF-2014S1A5A2A01010939) and IT R&D
program of MSIP/KEIT (2014, 10041313, UX-oriented
Mobile SW Platform).
REFERENCES

1. Adidas miCoach Elite. http://goo.gl/qECxs3.
2. Bolton, A. The super modern wardrobe. New York: Harry
N. Abrahms (2002).
3. Brown, B., Reeves, S. and Sherwood, S. Into the wild:
challenges and opportunities for field trial methods. Proc.
CHI’11, ACM (2011), 1657-1666.
4. Choe, E.K., et al. A. Understanding Quantified-Selfers’
Practices in Collecting and Exploring Personal Data. Proc.
CHI’14, ACM (2014) 1143-1152.
5. Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., and Landay, J.A.
Design Requirements for Technologies that Encourage
Physical Activity. Proc. CHI’06, ACM (2006), 457-466.
6. DeSilvey, C. Observed decay: telling stories with mutable
things. Journal of Material Culture, 11, 3 (2006), 318-338.
7. Erickson, T. and Kellogg, W. Social Translucence: An
Approach to Designing Systems that Support Social
Processes. ACM Transactions on Human-Computer
Interaction, 7, 1 (2000), 59-83.
8. Fallman, D. The new good: exploring the potential of
philosophy of technology to contribute to human-computer
interaction. In Proc. CHI'11, 1051-1060.
9. Fan, C., Forlizzi, J., and Dey, A. A Spark Of Activity:
Exploring Informative Art As Visualization For Physical
Activity. In Proc. UbiComp’12, ACM (2012), 81-84.
10. Fitbit. http://www.fitbit.com/.
11.Fitbit and Tory Burch. http://goo.gl/As7ce1.
12. Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Techology: Using Computers to
Change What We Think and Do. Ubiquity (2002), 89-120.
13. Fogg, B.J. “The new rules of persuasion.” RSA Digital
Journal, Summer 2009. Online.
14. Fougere, T. Tyndall Table (2012).
http://thomfougere.com/thomfougere-TyndallTable.
15. Frey, J., Fontana, A. The group interview in social research,
The Social Science Journal, 28(2) (1991), 175-187.
16. Gaver, W.W., Dunne, A., and Pacenti, E. Cultural Probes.
Interactions (1999), 21-29.
17. Heijdens’s Broken White. http://goo.gl/nnMuhE.

18. Hiiop, H. The Possibility of Patina in Contemporary Art or,
Does the ‘New Art’ Have a Right to Get Old? In Koht ja
paik. Place and Location. Studies in Environmental
Aesthetics and Semiotics VI Estonian Literary Museum,
Estonian Academy of Arts (2008), 153-165.
19. Hill, W., Hollan, J., Wroblewski, D. & McCandless, T. Edit
wear and read wear. Proc. CHI’92, ACM (1992), 3-9.
20. Jacobs, J. and Buechley, L. Codeable objects:
computational design and digital fabrication for novice
programmers. In Proc.CHI’13, ACM (2013), 1589-1598.
21. Khot, R., Hjorth, L., Mueller, F. Understanding Physical
Activity through 3D Printed Material Artifacts. In Proc.
CHI’14 (2014), 3835-3844.
22. Kleine, S. S., Kleine III, R. E. and Allen, C. T. How is a
possession" me" or" not me"? Characterizing types and an
antecedent of material possession attachment. Journal of
Consumer Research (1995), 327-343.
23. Ledger, D. & McCarffrey, D. Inside Wearables, Endeavour
Partners (2014).
24. Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. Using Context to Reveal
Factors that Affect Physical Activity. TOCHI, 19(1) (2012),
1-21.
25. Li, I., Dey, A.K.A., and Forlizzi, J. Understanding My
Data, Myself: Supporting Self-Reflection with Ubicomp
Technologies. In Proc. UbiComp’11, 405-414.
26. Lin, J.J., et al. Fish‘n’Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity
with an Interactive Computer Game. In Proc. UbiComp’06
(2006), 261-78.
27. Mauriello, M., Gubbels, M. and Froehlich, J. Social fabric
fitness: the design and evaluation of wearable E-textile
displays to support group running. Proc. CHI’14, 28332842
28. Pan, Y. and Blevis, E. Fashion thinking: lessons from
fashion and sustainable interaction design, concepts and
issues. In Proc. DIS’14, ACM, 1005-1014.
29. Requena, E. LOVE PROJECT. http://goo.gl/o19avO.
30. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., et al. Personal Tracking as Lived
Informatics. In Proc. CHI 2014, ACM, 1163-1172.
31. RunKeeper. http://runkeeper.com/.
32. Seymour, S. Fashionable Technology: The Intersection of
Design, Fashion, Science and Technology, Springer. 2008
33. Schütte, A. A. Patina: layering a history-of-use on digital
objects. MIT Media Laboratory (1998).
34. Simpson, I. The Encyclopedia of Drawing Techniques.
London: Headline (1987), 62–64.
35. Stack, K. NFL Prospects to Wear Smart, Data Gathering
Workout Shirt. Gizmodo (2011). http://goo.gl/xxbdan.
36. Swaminathan, S., et al. Supporting the design and
fabrication of physical visualizations. In Proc. CHI’14,
ACM, 3845-3854.
37. Zancheti, S. M., de Figueirôa Silva, A., Braga, A. C.,
Gameiro, F. G., Lira, F. B., & Costa, L. S. The patina of the
city. City & Time, 2 (2) (2006).

1182
View publication stats

