PLANWELL: Spatial User Interface for Collaborative Petroleum WellPlanning
Aditya Shekhar Nittala1,*, Nico Li1,§, Stephen Cartwright1,¤, Kazuki Takashima2,¥, Ehud Sharlin1,¶, Mario Costa Sousa1,ǂ
1 Department Of Computer Science, University Of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
2 Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University, Japan

Figure 1: (a) 3D printout, stylus and ipad used as the overseer interface (b) overseer operating on the 3D printout (c) visualizations
on
overseer
interface(d)
visualizations
on
explorer
interface
(f)
explorer
with
an
AR
device

Abstract
We present our prototype of PlanWell, a spatial augmented reality
interface that facilitates collaborative field operations. PlanWell
allows a central overseer (in a command and control center) and a
remote explorer (an outdoor user in the field) to explore and
collaborate within a geographical area. PlanWell provides the
overseer with a tangible user interface (TUI) based on a 3D
printout of surface geography which acts as a physical
representation of the region to be explored. Augmented reality is
used to dynamically overlay properties of the region as well as the
presence of the remote explorer and their actions on to the 3D
representation of the terrain. The overseer is able to perform the
actions directly on the TUI and then the overseer’s actions are
presented as dynamic AR visualizations superimposed on the
explorer’s view in the field. Although our interface could applied
to many domains, the PlanWell prototype was developed to
facilitate petroleum engineering tasks such as well planning and

*e-mail: anittala@ucalgary.ca
§
e-mail: li26@ucalgary.ca
¤
e-mail: sgcartwr@ucalgary.ca
¥
e-mail: takashima@riec.tohoku.ac.jp
¶
e-mail: ehud@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
ǂ
e-mail: smcosta@ucalgary.ca

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the
first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all
other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SA’15 Symposium on MGIA, November 02 – 06, 2015, Kobe, Japan.
ACM 978-1-4503-3928-5/15/11.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818427.2818443

coordination of drilling operations. Our paper describes the details
of the design and implementation of the current PlanWell
prototype in the context of petroleum well planning and drilling,
and discusses some of the preliminary reflections of two focus
group sessions with domain experts.
CR Categories: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces And
Presentation]: Artificial, augmented, and virtual realities; H.5.3
[Group and Organization Interfaces]: Computer-supported
cooperative work
Keywords: Augmented Reality, Spatial User Interaction,
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Tangible User Interfaces

1 INTRODUCTION

Many collaborative field tasks involve a centralized control center
overseeing multiple teams in the field. Collaboration between this
central control and the remote teams requires pertinent
information to be presented to each individual involved according
to their role in a timely and effective manner. Furthermore, it is
necessary to provide clear presentation of this information within
different contexts so that central control may effectively monitor
and advise individuals in the field and allow them to apply the
appropriate context to central control's requests. Failure to
accomplish this compromises situational awareness as well as
communication and thus the ability to complete the tasks
efficiently. Such failures could have a very high impact in critical
applications such as search and rescue, remote emergency
response and military operations. Even in less critical applications
these failures could lead to wasted time and money. We design
spatial tangible mobile interfaces that help alleviate some of these
challenges and apply it in the context of collaborative petroleum
well-planning workflow. Though PlanWell can be applied to
various collaborative terrain exploration scenarios and tasks such
as military operations and rescue missions, in this paper we use a
specific petroleum engineering scenario as the context and design
the system to address practical problems relating to remote
collaboration in such activities. We also conducted two focus

group discussions with domain experts to gather qualitative
feedback of our prototype and design approach.
Our work makes three main contributions:
1) A tangible 3D augmented reality technique providing clear and
intuitive spatial and structural awareness to a central overseer in a
command center, while providing immediate and relevant
information to a user in the field.
2) Application of the technique to a realistic engineering
scenario, based on feedback and suggestions gathered during
interviews with domain experts. The qualitative analysis of the
i
focus group discussions which have brought about interesting
insights on our design approach.
3) Details of our implementation so that others may build similar
applications as well as a technical evaluation which presents the
technical strengths and limitations of our system.

2 RELATED WORK
Our work falls under the intersection of the following themes in
HCI research:
1) Augmented Reality and Applications
2) Collaborative Augmented Reality
3) Tangible Interfaces for Collaboration
In this section we will be discussing the previous literature that
relates to our work and falls under the above mentioned themes.
2.1 Augmented Reality and Applications
Augmented reality has been used in a wide variety of domains
including civil engineering [Schall et al., 2008], tabletop reservoir
engineering interaction [Lapides et al., 2012], human-robot
interaction [Li et al., 2015], geographic visualization [Hedley et
al., 2002], and topographical terrain exploration [Li et al., 2014]
and for spatially aligning virtual objects with the real-world
objects [Bimber and Raskar,2005],[ Raskar et al., 1998].
2.2 Collaborative Augmented Reality
The use of augmented reality for collaborative tasks has been
explored extensively [Barakonyi et al., 2004], [ Billinghurst and
Kato, 2002]. With respect to remote collaboration, previous
research explored collaboration between an indoor and outdoor
user for managing and accessing spatial information [Hollerer et
al., 1999], [ Robert et al., 2013],[ Stafford et al., 2006]. Previous
research also explored the use of 3D spatiality in remote
collaboration [Gauglitz et al., 2014], [Sodhi et al., 2013].
2.3 Physical Interfaces For Collaboration
Attempts have been made to merge the physical environment with
remote collaboration and tangible user interfaces have also been
explored to support collaboration [Follmer et al., 2013], [Gauglitz
et al., 2012], [ Leibe et al., 2000]. Physicality has been explored in
remote collaboration with spatial and physical cues in distributed
collaborative environments and tabletop collaboration [Leithinger
et al., 2014], [Robinson and Tuddenham, 2007], [Sakong and
Nam, 2006]. However, to the best of our knowledge, the use of
3D printed scaled model of the environment for enhancing spatial
awareness during remote collaboration has not been explored in
general, and especially not in realistic scenarios such as the
applied domain of reservoir engineering.

3 PLANWELL
3.1 Design Considerations
Since our design and system has to be used by experts from

various domains who may not be experts in using computing
systems and environments, we had the following set of design
considerations and their respective implications on the design.
3D Printed Terrain as a TUI : Previous TUI research has
provided evidence that physical representations help in
understanding complex spatial environments and relationships
[Gillet et al., 2005], [Harris et al., 2011], [Jansen et al., 2013].
Geologists and Urban planners have already explored the
effectiveness of 3D printing to print physical models of GIS data
[Rase, 2009].The conclusions developed from this research
indicate that physical printed models enhance the spatial
situational awareness during collaboration.
Implications on Design: This previous positive research inspired
us to use physical 3D printed representation of the oil reservoir as
an interactive medium for collaboration.
Maintaining The Local Physical Context:
One of the
requirements of our system is that it should preserve the actual
physical context of the surroundings in which the users are
present.
Implications on Design: We could have used map based
navigation system or pure virtual environments for the
collaborative tasks. Though these techniques are efficient and
provide various essential features such as zooming and panning,
they disconnect the user from the actual physical environment.
We used Augmented Reality to ensure that the users (both the
overseer and the explorer) can perceive the physical context of
their local environment.
Interaction Design: Based on our discussions with domain experts,
we determined that the Surface Team is responsible for
coordinating and planning the drilling operations and the on-site
drilling team performs the required tasks. Based upon this setting,
we envision the overseer as the person or group who drives the
entire task, while the explorer is the user who typically \executes"
tasks based on the directions from the overseer. This corresponds
with how a surface team would work with the workers on-site.
Implications on Design: We empower the overseer to a wider set
of stylus-based interaction which enables him to annotate, and
sketch on the 3D printout, while the explorer can only visualize or
select some important features for analyzing them in-situ and
relaying the same information to the overseer.
Simple and Commercially available Apparatus: Another
requirement is that the system should be small and easily setup so
that it may be used in various application domains and situations.
The domain experts whom we envision to be our system users
might not be well-versed with setting up the environment; hence
our system needs to be easy and simple to be setup by novice
users without much training.
Implications on Design: There are multiple approaches such as a
shape/surface-changing display [Follmer et al.,2013] with AR, or
using a projector for overlaying content on the 3D printout
[Bimber and Raskar, 2005]. However these solutions are difficult
and complex to setup for non-experts and could limit the
flexibility of the system. For this reason, we use the mobile
Augmented Reality approach of using off the shelf mobile and
tablet devices as our AR displays.
3.2 Design
The primary design goal was to enable two parties to share a
spatial awareness via an interface designed to provide clear and
intuitive understanding of each other's situation, despite
differences in scale and perspective. To help us achieve this goal
we used 3D printing to generate a terrain model with realistic
spatial representation, as well as augmented reality techniques.
The explorer in the field uses the actual physical environment as

an interactive medium, and the overseer uses a 3D printed model
of the same environment as an interactive medium.
By designing for a specific petroleum engineering workflow, our
approach may be deployed and tested in a real world application.
In our scenario, a petroleum energy company would have a
surface team who would be responsible for all surface operations.
The surface team would collaborate with an on-field drilling team
(often a contractor) in order to plan and implement an oil or gas
well.
PlanWell contains two major components:
1) The overseer interface used by the surface team. In our
scenario, this would reside at the energy company office.
(Figure 1b, 1c and 1e).
2) The explorer interface used by the drilling team in the
field (Figure 1a and 1d.).

PlanWell also provides interactions that allow the overseer to
annotate and modify the existing data with a stylus (Figure 1c and
Figure 1e). The stylus enables the overseer to draw a relatively
precise path or select an area on the surface of the 3D model and
send it to the explorer to provide instruction or guidance. Also,
the overseer may drag and move an existing point-of-interest
(POI) to a new location, in order to allow the explorer to examine
it in the field. Apple iPad Air tablet was used as the handheld AR
device. The PlanWell explorer interface (Figure 1d) uses
augmented reality to superimpose the application-specific data
such as reservoir data or drilling locations onto the terrain around
the explorer, presenting static information such as petroleumreservoir properties, as well as dynamic information from the
overseer such as paths, selected areas and suggested locations of
wells. The communication is bi-directional.

4 IMPLEMENTATION

Figure 2: (a) Outdoor explorer with the AR device (b) overseer
using the tangible user interface with AR glasses (c) overseer
using an iPad as the AR device (d) Screenshot of explorer
interface (e) Screenshot of overseer interface
The overseer PlanWell interface uses a 3D printout as the
physical representation geographical area. This model was based
on real geographical data and produced using 3D printing, a
process that is fast becoming ubiquitous. Augmented reality is
used to superimpose the application-specific information onto the
3D printout. The combination of visual illustration as well as the
realistic spatial representation and tangible nature of the model
allows the overseer to understand the topographical properties of
the terrain intuitively and clearly. The goal of this arrangement is
to offer the overseer direct physical representation of the
topographical spatial properties enabling unambiguous
interpretation of spatial properties, and allowing access to the 3D
printed TUI both visually or by touch. The AR visual feedback
enables awareness of the activities in the field in real time, and
facilitates interactive access to the application-specific
visualization, superimposed on its scaled-down 3D physical
representation.
1Epson Moveiro: http://www.epson.com/moverio
2Shapeways Inc:http://www.shapeways.com/
3Vuforia: https://www.qualcomm.com/products/vuforia

Both the headset (Epson Moverio1) and the handheld screen (iPad
Air) were used as the AR device. The 3D printout of the terrain
model was provided by a 3D printing service vendor (Shapeways
Inc.2) based on the digital model of the terrain. PlanWell uses an
intermediate server to exchange information, including georeferences marked by the explorer and point-of-interests (POIs)
marked by the overseer or explorer. The overseer and explorer
clients are implemented on different devices and runtime
environments. The overseer interface was implemented on an
iPad Air running iOS and the explorer interface was implemented
on a Google Nexus 5 running Android.
Both clients display content via augmented reality. However, the
explorer interface provides a geo-reference based in-situ
experience by placing visualizations over the surrounding
environment, while the overseer interface creates an exocentric
visual experience and superimposes visualizations over the 3D
printout with pen based interactions implemented using the
Qualcomm Vuforia3 library. To achieve alignment between the
perspective and the physicality, the explorer interface uses the
built-in functions on the explorer's device such as the
accelerometer, step detector, magnetic and GPS sensors. The
overseer maintains alignment by tracking fiducial markers placed
around the 3D printout.
To tailor our design for the petroleum engineering domain, we
overlaid information, such as petrol-reservoir data and production
wells on the 3D printout as well as on actual physical terrain as
shown in figure 1(e) and figure 1(d). Both interfaces use OpenGL
ES to provide the visual elements.

5 APPLICATION SCENARIO
Petroleum well planning and drilling is the application that we
have targeted for this project. To test the effectiveness of our
prototype, we consider a scenario that contains tasks commonly
carried out during well planning and drilling operations.
Prior to the implementation of an oil or gas well, an
interdisciplinary surface team consisting of petroleum engineers,
geologists, civil engineers and planners meticulously plan the
logistics of the resource extraction including locations of the
drilling wells. The desired well locations are based on data
provided from reservoir engineers, although in practice there is
flexibility with regards to the actual location of the well due to
directional drilling. The surface team determines potential
locations for the wells based on the recommendations of the
reservoir engineers as well as the economics and logistics
determined by the surface team.

This plan is then sent over to the drilling team (often a contractor),
which is responsible for the drilling and operations of the physical
wells on the field. The drilling team must then build a more
detailed plan of how to implement the well, and suggest any
necessary changes to the surface team's plan. During the course of
the drilling team's planning, the potential well locations will
typically require site surveys and there may be back-and-forth
dialogue between the surface team and the drilling team based on
information uncovered during the site surveys. Potential well
locations may have environmental or archeological significance,
or have features that impact the economics or safety of the well.
After many potential iterations of planning, the drilling plan may
be executed. This entire turn-around time could take days or
weeks based on the complexity of the terrain and the drilling plan.
Our interface hopes to expedite this process and reduce the time
of this collaboration as well as improve communication of inform-

2d), and then the selection will be translated into world
coordinates and rendered as a red arrow on both the overseer and
explorer screens, pointing at the corresponding location. This POI
could be a certain terrain feature such as an environmental or
safety concern or it could be a potential well location (Figure 2c).
In the third scenario, in the case of a location determined to be
suitable for a well based on the site survey, the overseer then
could drag the representation of the well from an unsuitable place,
to this POI (Figure 2e). Meanwhile, the explorer could also see
the well representation appear on his AR interface (Figure 2f) at
the proper location as it is moved by the overseer.
The above scenario demonstrates the bidirectional information
exchange triggered by user interactions, and the corresponding
visual representations on both interfaces.

6 TECHNICAL EVALUATION
In this section we reflect on the potential of our system and
discuss our technical evaluation of the accuracy and latency of the
prototype.
Accuracy: The GPS accuracy of the Nexus5 smartphone which
was used as the explorer AR device is 10 meters. In our case, we
have mapped an area of 6km x 6km to a 20cm x 20cm 3D printout,
which means 1cm on the 3D printout represents 300m on the
actual terrain. This means that the explorer has to walk for 150m
for the overseer to observe a change of 0.5mm in the location of
the explorer on the 3D printout. This scale issue may negatively
impact the application design. Depending on the required
accuracy and exploration styles, (e.g. rough exploration by a car
vs a detailed exploration by walking) the impact of this metric
varies. A potential solution include the use of dynamic multi-scale
visualization on the 3D printout where the detailed information
could be presented with a magnification lens [Looser et al., 2007]
while enabling the user to switch back to the overview view with
correct spatial scale and texture. Also, the acceptable scale could
be determined based upon the application and the interface could
implemented with the appropriate scale for the application, if
feasible.
Latency: The data latency between the overseer and the explorer
depends on the transmission infrastructure. In this prototype, we
measured the latency of both sent and received JSON packets to
be on average 2.4 seconds measured over a one hour duration
between remote sites using a commercial cellular (3G) service.
This should be acceptable performance, since the distance covered
by the overseer in such a small time is should not be significant
for this application.

Figure 3 : (a) explorer position on 3D printout (b)
marches to another position (c) POI selected by
updated on 3D printout (d) the explorer marks a
overseer updating a POI on the 3D printout (f) POI
by overseer shown on explorer interface

explorer
explorer
POI (e)
updated

ation and therefore reduce the probability of errors.
We designed three primary interaction scenarios to facilitate such
remote collaboration for well-planning. In the first scenario the
explorer's location is dynamically updated on the 3D printout of
the overseer. While navigating the field (Figure 2b), the explorer's
geo-reference is continuously sent to the overseer, allowing the
overseer to maintain the spatial awareness of the explorer (Figure
2a).
In the second scenario, the explorer may select a particular POI
on the field by tapping on the touchscreen of the device (Figure

7 USER STUDY
We conducted two focus group sessions with domain experts to
gain further insights into our design. In this section, we will be
describing the major themes that emerged out of our discussions.
The results of both the focus groups were consistent and back up
our claims.
7.1 Focus Group
We conducted two focus groups with different set of domain
experts in each group. The first group had three experts who were
from the petroleum and reservoir engineering departments at the
University of Calgary. Though all of these experts are from the
academia, they have worked in or alongside different teams and
disciplines within the oil-and-gas- production cycle. They had
several years' of experience in the industry as well. The second

group had three experts who were from the industry. They are part
of the surface team and perform the well-planning and analysis.
Based on this, we believe our participants were qualified to
comment about the validity of our prototype. The aim of the focus
group was to gather qualitative feedback about the validity of our
prototype and its perceived benefit to the oil-and-gas production
cycle. We also sought to find the specific workflows for which
our prototype could provide value and gain feedback and
comments regarding improvements to the visual representation of
data and interaction techniques.
The focus group was conducted in a controlled setting with the
authors driving the entire session. The domain experts were first
instructed on the technology and concepts involved, such as
augmented reality. The instruction included both conceptual
discussions as well as demonstrations of the AR devices showing
some sample AR applications. The 3D printed model of the
terrain was then explained and the AR overlay on the 3D printout
was demonstrated. The participants had the opportunity to try our
demo with both the iPad and the Epson headset. The participants
were then introduced to the pen-based interactions and
encouraged to try them on the 3D printout. The participants were
also shown the explorer interface. For simplicity, we mocked up
the explorer interface to show the explorer AR overlay and
visualizations in the focus group session. The experts were given
the opportunity to try our entire system with mock scenarios and
the participants also had the opportunity to take the role of both
the overseer and the explorer.
Once the experts seemed to fully understand the functionality and
interaction techniques of the prototype, we conducted the focus
group. The entire conversation was audio-recorded and the
sessions lasted for 60 minutes each. Using the audio recordings
we transcribed the audio for both the focus group discussions. We
performed open coding of the transcribed data in order to group
broad themes and identify interesting observations [Strauss et al.,
1990]. For the discussion of the results we refer to the academic
experts from the first focus group discussion as A1, A2 and A3,
while the experts from the industry are referred as I1, I2, and I3.

8 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The domain experts were quite excited and interested by the
prototype. They claimed to have not seen anything similar and
provided valuable feedback about how PlanWell could be useful
in the oil and gas industry. During our focus group study, the
following major themes emerged.

8.1 The Role of 3D Printout for Better Spatial
Understanding
Previous TUI research has confirmed that physical representations
help in understanding complex spatial representations and
relationships [Gillet et al., 2005], [Harris et al., 2011], [Jansen et
al., 2013]. Our focus group affirmed these claims. The domain
experts felt that the 3D printed models could be useful in clearly
and intuitively understanding the nuances of the terrain. For
example one of the domain experts explained that with a 3D
printout of the terrain, it would be easier to know the appropriate
pad sites for well construction which ultimately helps in reducing
the time and cost and reduces errors. One of the domain experts
from the first group also expressed similar views saying that 3D
printed models could help in understanding the regularities and
irregularities on the surface based on which well platforms can be
constructed. However, with respect to quantitative measures such
as task efficiency and productivity, the expert was unsure how 2D
map would compare against a 3D printed model. We believe that

a quantitative task based evaluation would help us in answering
this question.
“With the 2D map, it is tougher. For example, we decide a pad on
the edge of the hill and then the scout guys takes two weeks, and
analyses the location and says, that its not going to work, then we
choose a new pad and then again scout again takes 15 days, goes
to the new place and then maybe if it works then we start with the
drilling, otherwise the cycle continues. So with the 3D printout, its
easier to get to know the appropriate pad sites. Having a better
idea about what's there on the ground and the features help in
reducing the time and cost." - I1.
“Based on the regularity or irregularities of the surface, well
platforms can be constructed. These regularities and
irregularities can be easily visible on a 3D printout. But I am not
sure how this can be compared to 2D maps" - A2.

8.2 Enhanced Collaboration between The Two
Remote Teams

With current practices in the petroleum engineering domain, the
planning of a well can take a very long time and there is a need
for collaboration throughout this time period. Our experts claimed
that this application could be best for facilitating real-time
coordination and communication between remote teams and
planners and could significantly reduce both the time spent
planning and the potential for miscommunication and error.
“Communication breaks between the field scout and the office
planning team. The coordination misses and results in lot of time
and money. There is a lot of break between the guys on field
trying to find the location and the office team tries to plan the
location. It takes a lot longer for us to get these pads approved.
By the time they get the crown approved, it takes 6-8 months' time.
And the from the time we plan the pad to the time we start drilling
there sometimes we miss the timing and coordination and then we
have to go somewhere else. Having a tool like this allows you to
be able to in the office and see right up front, what is happening,
what is looks like, the issues encountered and shorten the time, so
that the locations can be approved, and get them on production
and follow the yearly production forecast cycle."- I1
“This application could be best for the coordination between the
surface team and the on-field drilling team." - A1.
“When there is change in the location of the well, then it has to go
back to the drilling engineer because they have to
correspondingly change the plan according to the new location.
With this tool, the information exchange between the remote sites
enables the teams to dynamically change the plans." - A3.
Based on the comments of the experts, it is evident that the
collaboration facilitated by PlanWell can help the remote teams to
dynamically plan, change and edit well locations and other
operations and thus reduce time and cost of the collaborative work
we have described.

8.3 The power of Spatial Augmented Reality
Our experts were very much impressed with the AR interface and
the ability to overlay information over the physical environment.
They suggested that such spatially augmented reality could save
them time and money as they can test the well locations and well
types by overlaying virtual wells while in direct communication
with the planners. They also suggested other information that
could be overlaid on both the explorer's surroundings and the 3D
printout. This includes information such as details regarding well
locations and well types, locations of archaeological sites,
environmentally sensitive areas, flood plains and watersheds.
“There could be constraints such as a particular site could be
archaeological site, or there could be lot of underground water,

or there could be lakes and rivers. All this information can also be
overlaid." - A2.

8.4 3D printout as a Collocated Collaborative
Interface
The current PCs and desktop computers which are widely used
are designed for single-user applications and don't support
comfortable and effective collocated collaboration. Tabletop
systems have been developed that support collocated
collaboration between users [Buisine et al., 2012], [Rogers and
Lindley, 2004]. Extending upon these tabletop interfaces, tangible
user interfaces have also been built that supported collocated
collaboration. Based on this previous literature we envision that
our 3D printed terrain model could be an effective tangible user
interface that supports collocated collaboration. The domain
experts' views from our focus group discussion also supported our
vision. The experts claimed that the 3D printed physical terrain
model in the PlanWell interface could be a collaboration tool
which would be useful in bringing multiple experts from various
domains to collaborate on well planning tasks. Such a
collaborative medium could facilitate common spatial awareness
between all the users and hence could significantly reduce the
time for decision-making process.
“The 3D printed terrain model could be very useful collaboration
tool. This could be leveraged as a useful collaboration tool to get
multiple people." - I3.
“The overseer rather than one person per explorer trip could be
an entire team that could collaborate over the 3d printout and
finalize it in a single trip and reduce the cycle time and cost." - I2.

8.5 Physicality and the
Interaction on the 3D printout

3D

stylus-Based

One of the important features that our PlanWell prototype offers
is the physicality provided by the 3D printout. Physical interfaces
add value as they allow the user to touch, feel and manipulate the
interface. This is particularly useful in domains such as geology,
archaeology, and reservoir engineering as the experts generally
prefer to touch and “feel" the surface for analysis.
“Physicality adds value. I always prefer the physical models,
touching it and feeling it. We use 2D maps which are so old
fashioned and we miss so many things. Now this 3D model acts as
a decision space where I can now everything in 3D. Now I see the
value in physical level in addition because with software 3D
models there always some issues with respect to perception and
there are always some errors and spatial data errors and these
would easily be corrected with the physical model. You can
measure it to fair extent and look at the 3D digital models, but it
doesn't much relate to the real world." - I1.
Although computer generated models provide 3D visualization,
these visualizations are often complex and there could be
perception issues [Johnson, 2004] ,[Ware, 2012]. The physicality
provided by the 3D printed model resolves this perception issue as
the visualization now is physical and relates to the real-world.
During the focus group discussion the various perception issues
the experts experienced in the commercial 3D software packages
were described. Sometimes these perception issues make it very
difficult for the older staff to grasp the interaction with the 3D
virtual models in relation to their physical real-world interaction.
Also the modes of interaction with the 3D spatial data in the
commercial software packages are with 2D interfaces such as
mouse and keypads. This makes the interaction with 3D terrain
non-intuitive and often leaves the user clueless about the

orientation of the model. These issues were explained in detail by
the experts in our focus group discussions.
“For older staff, sometimes it's very difficult to orient and
visualize the 3D visualization. Not even operating the tool, just
visualizing the model, spinning and orienting themselves to the
view is very difficult to get and understand what they are seeing.
It does happen quite often. Physicality helps in conveying certain
spatial concepts to people." - I2.
One of the other important features the PlanWell interface is the
natural 3D stylus interactions which allow the overseer to sketch
and draw on the 3D printout. This is in particular useful as it
provides a natural 3D interaction with the physical world,
compared to the 2D visualizations of 3D data as offered by the
current commercial software packages. Many times, experts
interact with high resolution data and sketching of paths is one of
the most common modes of interaction. However the current 3D
software packages make it very non-intuitive for this mode of
interaction and make sketching a path a multi-step process. The
users have to make 2D sketches and these need to be converted
into 3D shape file by another specialized software and this file is
fed as input to the 3D visualization software to visualize the final
output. Our stylus-based interaction approach eliminates this
multi-step approach and enables the user to directly interact with
the data without any perception issues.
“Sometimes we work on smaller area and higher resolution. The
process we do now are with commercial map-based software, we
make 2D sketches, and go through a rather multiple-step process,
like make that into a shape file, load it into a 3D software. The
pen-based interactions are very intuitive because they can sketch
it onto the actual 3D printout and there are no perception issues.
More over direct input on the 3D printout is very intuitive and
presents natural interaction, rather than 2d sketches on 3d data
using software. The current sketching and planning process is
multiple-step approach. They use 2d map-based software which
allows them make some sketches for planning. In order to
visualize and plan them in 3D, these 2d sketches involve a
multiple step process to convert to 3D, i.e. they need to create
shape file and then input this into another commercial 3D viz
software and then visualize it. And again when they have to make
a new sketch or change the existing sketch, they have to go back
to the previous 2D maps-based software, make a new sketch and
convert and then see it 3D using the 3D software. So this
sketching and planning operations are very time consuming and
non-intuitive." - I1.

8.6 Applicability beyond Well Planning
Our experts commented that our prototype had the potential to be
useful for other workflows within the petroleum engineering
domain. These include monitoring remote oil rigs, reservoir
planning and facilitating collaboration between reservoir
engineers and geologists for tasks such as extrapolating subsurface models from the surface terrain. There may also be
applications to geomatics and civil engineering.
“This could be very useful for the geomatics guys, especially the
ones who do mapping and surveying." - A3.
“This 3D model could help in estimating the sub-surface model
that lies beneath the earth. The terrain pattern could be used to
extrapolate the subsurface which could also be useful in reservoir
engineering studies." - A1.
“The application could be useful in monitoring rig movements.
For example if there are a number of rigs place on the field, the
overseer can monitor the rig movements and plan for the
upcoming strategies, for production." - A2.

“Civil engineers could also use PlanWell, for construction of
roads, structures etc" - A3.
Based on this feedback, we envision that our PlanWell concept
could be useful and applicable across a various domains for a
variety of tasks

9 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
PlanWell is functional and was designed according to input from
domain experts and reservoir engineers. However, though our
focus groups and interviews affirm the applicability and usability
of our prototype, it is still a preliminary prototype. We have not
validated its usability “in-the-wild" with domain users performing
actual tasks. One current limitation of our design is the
procurement of high quality 3D printed models. A geographical
region may be very detailed and complex and it is still an effort to
print a high quality 3D version of it. However with the
progression of the current 3D printing technologies, it is likely
that this barrier will eventually be reduced if not completely
eliminated. Another limitation is the AR devices of the overseer
interface. It could be tiresome for the users to hold the hand-held
device and operate on the TUI. Though this ergonomic issue
could be solved by the AR headset, the headset suffered from a
limited field-of view and low resolution display which might not
be suitable for visualizing high resolution data. Although
PlanWell provides a novel interaction and collaboration
mechanism for remote users, its comparison with traditional maps
or desktop tools must be further investigated to determine if there
are clear advantages to conventional 2d maps. With respect to the
collaborative features, we would like to extend the design to
multiple (non-collocated) explorers and also to multiple (noncollocated) overseers, all analyzing the same reservoir model.

10 CONCLUSION
We presented our PlanWell prototype which facilitates
collaborative well planning and drilling operations using AR and
3D printing technologies. This system allows a central overseer
and an in the field explorer to dynamically exchange information
within a shared spatial medium. The overseer uses a scaled 3D
printed model of the petroleum reservoir surface terrain, which
acts as an aid to understand the spatial nuances of the terrain and
also as a tangible user interface (TUI). The seamless integration of
AR with the TUI provides visual as well as tactile sensation about
the petroleum-reservoir surface terrain and supports collaboration
between the overseer and the explorer. The explorer interacts
with the surface environment directly via an AR interface. Our
contributions include the use of an AR interface using a 3D
printed terrain model to support interactive techniques that
provide spatial and structural awareness during collaborative
navigational tasks. We apply this interface to a realistic petroleum
engineering scenario and discuss our design and prototype
implementation with domain experts. Based on these discussions,
PlanWell could prove to be a practical tool which would provide
value to collaborative petroleum engineering workflows.

11 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues and reviewers for their
valuable comments, suggestions and discussions. We also would
like to thank the subject matter experts from the Department of
Petroleum Engineering at the University of Calgary and
BirchCliff Energy Ltd for their valuable feedback during the focus
group sessions. We would like to thank Foundation CMG for their

support of the Foundation CMG/Frank and Sarah Meyer
Collaboration Centre. This research was supported by the Alberta
Innovates Academy (AITF) / Foundation CMG Industrial
Research Chair in Scalable Reservoir Visualization.

References
BARAKONYI, I., FAHMY, T., AND SCHMALSTIEG, D. (2004).
Remote collaboration using augmented reality videoconferencing.
In Proceedings of Graphics interface 2004, pages 89- 96.
Canadian Human-Computer Communications Society.
BILLINGHURST, M. AND KATO,H. (2002). Collaborative
augmented reality. Communications of the ACM, 45(7):64-70.
BIMBER, O. AND RASKAR, R.(2005). Spatial augmented reality:
merging real and virtual worlds. CRC Press.
BUISINE, S., BESACIER, G., AOUSSAT, A AND VERNIER, F. (2012).
How do interactive tabletop systems influence collaboration?
Computers in Human
Behavior, 28(1):49-59.
FOLLMER, S., LEITHINGER, D., OLWAL, A., HOGGE, A., AND ISHII,
H. (2013). inform: dynamic physical affordances and constraints
through shape and object actuation. In UIST, volume 13, pages
417-426.
GAUGLITZ, S., LEE, C., TURK, M., AND HOLLERER, T. (2012).
Integrating the physical environment into mobile remote
collaboration. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference
on Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services,
pages 241-250. ACM.
GAUGLITZ, S., NUERNBERGER, B., TURK, M., AND HOLLERER, T.
(2014). World-stabilized annotations and virtual scene navigation
for remote collaboration. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, pages
449-459. ACM.
GILLET, A., SANNER, M., STOFFLER, D., AND OLSON, A. (2005).
Tangible interfaces for structural molecular biology. Structure,
13(3):483-491.
HARRIS, J., YOUNG, J., SULTANUM, N., LAPIDES, P., SHARLIN, E.,
AND SOUSA, M. C. (2011). Designing snakey: a tangible user
interface supporting well path planning. In Human-Computer
Interaction-INTERACT 2011, pages 45-53. Springer.
HEDLEY, N. R., BILLINGHURST, M., POSTNER, L., MAY, R., AND
KATO, H. (2002). Explorations in the use of augmented reality for
geographic visualization. PRESENCE: Teleoperators and virtual
environments, 11(2):119-133.
HOLLERER, T., FEINER, S., TERAUCHI, T., RASHID, G., AND
HALLAWAY, D. (1999). Exploring mars: developing indoor and
outdoor user interfaces to a mobile augmented reality system.
Computers &Graphics, 23(6):779-785.
JANSEN, Y., DRAGICEVIC, P., AND FEKETE, J.-D. (2013).
Evaluating the efficiency of physical visualizations. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 2593-2602. ACM.

JOHNSON, C. (2004). Top scientific visualization research
problems. Computer graphics and applications, IEEE, 24(4):13-17.
LAPIDES, P., SULTANUM, N., SHARLIN, E., AND SOUSA, M. C.
(2012). Seamless mixed reality tracking in tabletop reservoir
engineering interaction. In Proceedings of the International
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, pages 725728. ACM.
LEIBE, B., STARNER, T., RIBARSKY, W.,WARTELL, Z., KRUM, D.,
WEEKS, J., SINGLETARY, B., AND HEDGES, L. (2000). Toward
spontaneous interaction with the perceptive workbench. Computer
Graphics and Applications, IEEE, 20(6):54-65.
LEITHINGER, D., FOLLMER, S., OLWAL, A., AND ISHII, H. (2014).
Physical telepresence: shape capture and display for embodied,
computer-mediated remote collaboration. In Proceedings of the
27th annual ACM symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, pages 461-470. ACM.
LI, N., CARTWRIGHT, S., SHEKHAR NITTALA, A., SHARLIN, E., AND
COSTA SOUSA, M. (2015). Flying frustum: A spatial interface for
enhancing human-UAV awareness. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Human-agent Interaction, HAI '15.
ACM.
LI, N., NITTALA, A. S., SHARLIN, E., AND COSTA SOUSA, M.
(2014). Shvil: collaborative augmented reality land navigation. In
CHI'14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1291-1296. ACM.
LOOSER, J., GRASSET, R., AND BILLINGHURST, M. (2007). A 3d
flexible and tangible magic lens in augmented reality. In
Proceedings of the 2007 6th IEEE and ACM International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pages 1-4. IEEE
Computer Society.
RASE, W.-D. (2009). Visualization of three-dimensional gis
objects using rapid prototyping technology. Paper presented at
GeoViz Hamburg, 3:5.
RASKAR, R., WELCH, G., AND FUCHS, H. (1998). Spatially
augmented reality. In First IEEE Workshop on Augmented
Reality (IWAR 98), pages 11-20. Citeseer.
ROBERT, K., ZHU, D., HUANG, W.,ALEM, L., AND GEDEON, T.
(2013). Mobilehelper: remote guiding using smart mobile devices,
hand gestures and augmented reality. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2013
Symposium on Mobile Graphics and Interactive Applications,
page 39. ACM.
ROBINSON, P. AND TUDDENHAM, P. (2007). Distributed tabletops:
Supporting remote and mixed-presence tabletop collaboration. In
Horizontal Interactive Human-Computer Systems, 2007.
TABLETOP'07. Second Annual IEEE International Workshop on,
pages 19-26. IEEE.
ROGERS, Y. AND LINDLEY, S. (2004). Collaborating around
vertical and horizontal large interactive displays: which way is
best? Interacting with Computers, 16(6):1133-1152.
SAKONG, K. AND NAM, T.-J. (2006). Supporting telepresence by
visual and physical cues in distributed 3d collaborative design

environments. In CHI'06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pages 1283-1288. ACM.
SCHALL, G., MENDEZ, E., AND SCHMALSTIEG, D. (2008). Virtual
redlining for civil engineering in real environments. In
Proceedings of the 7th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, pages 95-98. IEEE Computer
Society.
SODHI, R. S., JONES, B. R., FORSYTH, D.,BAILEY, B. P., AND
MACIOCCI, G. (2013). Bethere: 3d mobile collaboration with
spatial input. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 179-188. ACM.
STAFFORD, A., PIEKARSKI, W., AND THOMAS, B. (2006).
Implementation of god-like interaction techniques for supporting
collaboration between outdoor AR and indoor tabletop users. In
Proceedings of the 5th IEEE and ACM International Symposium
on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pages 165-172. IEEE
Computer Society.
STRAUSS, A. L., CORBIN, J. M. (1990). Basics of qualitative
research, volume 15. Sage Newbury Park, CA.
WARE, C. (2012). Information visualization: perception for
design. Elsevier.

