Transimage 2018
Proceedings of the 5th Biennial Transdisciplinary Imaging Conference 2018

Printing Walkable Visualizations
Dario Rodighiero dario.rodighiero@epfl.ch
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

Photo: from left Dario Rodighiero (EPFL), Prof. Frédéric Kaplan (EPFL),
and Prof. Bruno Latour (Sciences Po) at DH2014 @ Giorgio Uboldi, (Calibro)

Rodighiero, D. 2018. Printing Walkable Visualizations. In: Proceedings of the 5th Biennial Research Transdisciplinary Imaging Conference,
TI2018, 18-20 April 2018, Edinburgh, UK. DOI: 10.6084/m9.figshare.6104693
58

Printing Walkable Visualizations

Dario Rodighiero

Abstract

École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

This article concerns a specific actor in the actualization
process, the media. The conventional media for
visualizations is the computer screen, a visual device
that supports the practices of design and reading.
However, visualizations also appear in other ways, for
example as posters, articles, books, or projections. This
article focuses, in particular, on a pretty unusual
medium called floor or walkable visualization.

Lausanne, Switzerland
dario.rodighiero@epfl.ch

Author Keywords
Actualization; Floor Visualization; Digital Humanities;
Data Visualization; Reading; Visual Representation.

ACM Classification Keywords
Human-centered computing; Visualization; Empirical
studies in visualization.

Introduction
Visualizations are created through the process of
actualization, which transforms ideas into tangible
artifacts ready to be used. Actualizing a data
visualization, hereinafter referred to as visualization for
the sake of brevity, is a complex process that requires
the contribution of several actors. To get a real sense of
its complexity, it should be remembered that actual
visualizations cannot exist without all of their possible
variations. This fascinating picture was conceived by
59

Gilles Deleuze to describe the sense of multiplicity that
is hidden behind each artifact [4:148]. This multiplicity
relies on the contribution of human and non-human
actors such as the author, the client, the data, and the
media. All of them contribute in different ways to
actualize a visualization by making it an interactive
object.
This article concerns a specific actor in the actualization
process, the media. The conventional media for
visualizations is the computer screen, a visual device
that supports the practices of design and reading.
However, visualizations also appear in other ways, for
example as posters, articles, books, or projections. This
article focuses, in particular, on a pretty unusual
medium called floor or walkable visualization. Walkable
visualizations correspond to a specific type of
actualization, or physicalization [13]. They take the
form of a large print format that is laid on the ground in
order to invite people to be part of a collective reading.
This article deals with this subject matter through two
empirical case studies, which will now be illustrated and
discussed in more depth.

hundred highly connected nodes using different media:
social networks, posters, web sites, email messages,
mugs, t-shirts, etc. [22]. For the opening, another very
special media was created in order to welcome the
conference attendees, the network was actualized in a
walkable visualization. In other words, attendees were
invited to explore it by walking directly on it. Although
they were initially afraid of doing so because the sticker
was brand new, after a while the instinct of exploration
guided them to walk on the sticker.

Digital Humanities 2014
The first case study happened in 2014, during the
Digital Humanities conference. A round sticker with a
diameter of six meters was printed and stuck to the
ground in front of the entrance to the SwissTech
Convention Center in Lausanne (see figure 1). Shown
on its surface was a network visualization with all the
authors that contributed to the conference. The nodes
of the network represented these authors, who were
linked and situated according to their co-authorship and
publication keywords [25]. The idea was to brand the
conference with this network composed of around eight

Figure 1: The walkable visualization presented a network of all
the authors accepted to the Digital Humanities conference.

60

Before printing the sticker, there was a discussion
about the network model. Doubt still lingered over
whether it would be better to use keywords or the
names of individuals to represent the nodes. Which
type would have been better for grabbing the interest
of the attendees? Keywords would have provided a map
of the discipline, which might have depicted the identity
of Digital Humanities and the role of the digital
humanist within its community [9]. On the other hand,
individuals would have represented the authors of the
conference, helping to remind attendees that a
discipline is pursued by a community and its members.
The final choice was to use the individuals instead of
the keywords. Individuals were considered more
appropriate in order to celebrate the scientific collective
that has been building a little bit at a time.

Figure 2: Brian Corxall asks for a portrait when lying next to
his research group [3].

It was a great pleasure seeing the attendees enjoying
the walkable visualization. Their comprehension of what
the visualization represented was immediate. After a
brief moment of studying it, attendees were engaged in
searching for themselves as in a sort of gamification of
social networks. Portraits and selfies posted to Twitter
by attendees were used to celebrate the successful
discovery of themselves on the visualization (see
figure 2). The browsing also led attendees to find their
acquaintances by retracing the social ties that define
the community structure. The search in the walkable
visualization was not only an operation of selfrecognition, but also a way to understand the diversity
of individuals contributing to the Digital Humanities
community.
Displaying a public visualization of the Digital
Humanities community members was a way to
welcome attendees to the conference. However, from
the beginning of the conference we realized how strong
the message of the visualizations was. Members of the
discipline were proud to be publicly represented,
likewise the distribution of the conference proceedings.
Authors were happy to be shown in the visualization,
but at the same time some people were excluded, like
the attendees without a publication. For instance, a
complaint was made from a member of the organizing
committee, who asked us to modify the visualization to
add all of them. Of course, that was impossible since
the branded object had been produced the previous
week, including the walkable visualization. However,
such a compliant was very interesting. It was proof of
people’s attachment to the community as well as its
representation, and turned us towards a general
reflection about the difficulty in creating a public
representation of individuals.
61

Creating a walkable visualization requires a lot of
preparation. The first thing to do is to check the
budget, as large printing can be very expensive. Then it
is necessary to find a professional in large format
printing. The sticker for the first case study was
sponsored by the conference, and the work was
commissioned to a company based in Lausanne, which
specialized in visual communication for public events.
This company could print on slip-resistant surfaces that
had been especially conceived for external use.
The visualization of the Digital Humanities conference
was initially created with Gephi, a tool for network
analysis [2]. All the relevant data concerning the
conference publications were treated and imported into
this software through an algorithm written in R.
Successively, the nodes were situated using the
Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm, which optimizes the
use of circular space, providing a pleasant geometrical
arrangement [7]. The network was exported in vector
graphics and modified through Adobe Illustrator in
order to customize colors and assure its readability (see
figure 3). As floor visualizations have no standards that
indicate an appropriate typography, the layout was
based on some tests performed by reading the network
at the distance of a standing person, which is around
1.70 meters. Finally, the labels of the nodes were set
up at 56 points using the Myriad Pro font on a neutral
background color, while the thickness of the links was
balanced to reduce the visual noise.

Figure 3: A reproduction of the final PDF file used to print the
six-meter visualization for the Digital Humanities conference.

62

Visualizations in the Environment
The case study of the Digital Humanities conference
allowed for the identification of three qualities that
make visualizations walkable; namely, orientation,
location and size. This section begins by introducing
these qualities that, successively, were used to define
the environment, a concept used to make the
complexity of visualizations visible.
The orientation of computer screens, for example,
highly typifies visualizations. These devices, usually
upright, face towards the readers in front of them and
hide who is behind them. A horizontal orientation, on
the contrary, avoids exclusions and invites readers to
access the visualization from any direction.
Making a visualization accessible from any direction
means an appropriate location must be chosen. In
many war movies, for instance, the military
intervention is planned around a table where a map lies
horizontally. This specific location greatly encourages
social interaction, but at the same time it limits the size
of the map. The information at the center of the map,
indeed, has to be readable from the borders. Thus, the
map cannot exceed a given dimension. If it does
exceed a certain dimension then the readers should be
able to enter the map.
Indeed, entering the map is necessary when its size
oversteps the limits of the table-location readability.
During the seventeenth century, the astronomer
Giovanni Domenico Cassini directed the drawing of a
planisphere on the floor of the Parisian observatory
[12:94]. Centered on the North Pole, the planisphere
represented the known world with a new technique of
measuring. Cartographers were invited to walk on it to

assess the precision of the new measure, which should
have produced improvements in the longitudinal
projection. The Cassini drawing substantially exceeded
the usual size of the maps occupying a larger surface
area. Such a size drastically changed the behavior of
the readers. They were not forced to stay outside the
map anymore; rather, they were invited to enter it and
walk on a cartographic version of the world. From this
example, it can be observed that size is an essential
consideration for visualizations in order to create
enough space for walking, which assures the
simultaneous interaction of the readers.
Orientation, location, and size are thus fundamental
qualities for characterizing the environment, or the
space where the visualization reading occurs.
Environment is a term that is part of ecological
psychology, a visual theory introduced by James J.
Gibson that he used to describe a closed system where
human and non-human actors mutually interact [8].
For him, each human has its surroundings, which
correspond to its individual perspective on the
environment. Humans interact through their own
surroundings, which make visible and invisible the
affordances that the environment can offer. Affordance
is a term commonly used in different scientific
disciplines to refer to the general interaction between
two actors. More precisely, it refers to all the
opportunities that a thing, a person, or a space makes
available to others. Donald Norman, for instance, uses
the concept of affordance when referring to the
opportunities of interaction that the everyday objects
offer to users [18].
The concepts of environment, surroundings, and
affordance help to more precisely define the interaction
63

with a visualization. The visualization is not a mere
object related to its reader, it is part of a system, i.e.
the environment, which is composed of different actors
such as the reader. Visualization and the reader are the
basic pairing which makes the interaction possible.
However, with respect to the first case study, the
reader is not alone: more readers can interact
simultaneously with the same visualization, and within
the same environment. In addition, orientation,
location, and size are all elements that characterize the
environment and encourage certain interaction over
others. Large floor visualizations, for instance, invite
exploration by walking instead of by using a mouse. As
a result, the visualization reading becomes a more
complex system to which many actors, human and
non-human, contribute.

64

ENAC Research Day 2016
The second case study was organized in collaboration
with the ENAC, the school that groups together the
institutes of architecture, civil engineering, and
environmental engineering within the EPFL. Each year
the ENAC deanship organizes a Research Day event for
which all its scholars are invited. This event is a time to
foster new synergies through different activities such as
conferences, workshops, and showcases. The ENAC
Research Day of 2016 was the ideal opportunity to
share a visual representation of the school itself,
entitled Affinity Map, in the form of a walkable
visualization. The idea was to stimulate a public debate
about the organization of the school and sensitize its
members to the issue of visual self-representation.
The Affinity Map was a sophisticated visualization that
presented the general organization of the ENAC
scholars through their affinities. But what exactly is an
affinity? The term affinity describes the intellectual and
operational closeness that may bring, or has brought,
people to work together. And what exactly is a map?
The term map is used to indicate that the visualization
is an instrument for a specific use. For example, large
organizations are difficult to grasp in their wholeness
and data visualization can help for this purpose; the
Affinity Map is thus a possible solution to the problem
of governance in large academic organizations such as
the ENAC.
The Affinity Map followed the relational model of
networks, arranging the nodes according to the
strengths of their ties. The Affinity Map was, however,
an unusual network in that its one thousand scholars
were grouped by laboratories through a double
structure of links: several chord diagrams constituted a

larger hexagonal network (see figure 4). In addition,
the type of the link relation was made visible. The
result was a visualization able to represent the
complexity of an academic organization through a
multi-level and multidimensional network [24,26].

Figure 4: The map of affinities shows ENAC laboratories
organized in a hexagonal network according to their actual and
potential collaborations.

65

The location chosen for the installation was the building
of architecture, whose center hosted a large foyer that
was a way station for a lot of students and scholars.
That foyer was an ideal spot to situate the visualization
as its location assured a high volume of people would
pass through. A search was run to find a cheaper
material for printing because the available space
allowed the creation of a walkable surface that would
be larger than the first case study. During the search,
another company offered to print on the tarpaulin, a
heavy waterproof covering usually employed in truck
trailers. The cost estimate was not lower for the
material price but rather for the laying, as it did not
require a specialist whose hourly labor cost would be
high. According to the budget restrictions, the foyer’s
square footage, and the printer size limits, a
visualization that encompassed 250 square meters was
finally produced (see figure 5). Three surfaces
measuring 5 by 15 were printed, making the most of
the machinery’s maximum width. Successively, a truck
carried these prints from Lucerne to Lausanne where
they were lay in side-by-side.

Figure 5: The walkable visualization measuring 250 square
meters is unveiled during the ENAC Research Day.
@ Alexandre Gonzalez 2016

66

Contemplators and Participants
The ENAC Research Day was a pretext to go one step
further, experimenting with a more complex
environment. Indeed, the foyer was characterized by a
much bigger walkable space, as well as by the presence
of two levels of balconies that allowed readers to step
ten meters away from the visualization. As a result, the
map could be read from either a close or a distant point
of view, in other words from either a close or a distant
reading. Although these terms represent an abstraction
of the digital humanist’s approach to the study of a
corpus of documents [17], their meaning is here
brought back to the physical sense of distance, which
might recall the tension that exists between the
overview and the details of the visual informationseeking mantra [27]. What might be referred to as
close reading happened by walking on the visualization.
That action was similar to the interaction of the first
case study, where readers accessed the details of visual
information up close. On the other hand, distant
reading occurred when the readers overlooked the
visualization from the balconies. That behavior
resembled the bird’s eye view typical of cartographic
projections, which gives an expansive view of the whole
map. The two affordances offered readers access to
different information: close reading was appropriate for
looking inside the laboratories to the level of the
individuals and their affinities, while distant reading
was suitable for looking at laboratories as basic
elements. Although Rudolf Arnheim thought floor
visualizations discouraged the detached contemplation
that cartography usually provides [1:13], in this case
study the balconies offered a solution to the problem of
the closeness by regulating the distance of the reading.

Upon reflection, however, it is interesting to note that
that double distance of reading was effective because
of the multiple levels of the map, without them the
experiment would not have been successful. The
Affinity Map was indeed designed to display different
levels of information corresponding to the school
hierarchy: namely to scholars, laboratories, institutes,
and the whole organization. Such levels of information
were blended into a unique visualization using different
sizes: scholars as small typographical elements, and
institutes as colors characterizing the large laboratory
circles. Whereas topographic representation relies on a
reduction of information according to the mapping
scale, the Affinity Map yields a continuity integrating
visual elements of different sizes. This continuity is not
simulated through images of different resolutions as in
the case of Google Maps, but is real as its focus is
based on an optic zoom [14]. The readers can decide
the information they wish to see by moving back and
forth from the visualization.
The human movement of zooming by walking suggests
a fictional comparison. Jonathan Swift wrote a book
about the travels of his character Lemuel Gulliver, first
a surgeon and then a captain of several ships [28]. In
his exploration of imaginary worlds, Gulliver visited two
places of different scales: an island called Lilliput where
inhabitants were much smaller than him, and the land
of Brobdingnag that was populated by giant-sized
people. He learned what it meant to be smaller and
bigger, like the readers during the ENAC Research Day.
But what exactly did it mean to be smaller and bigger
for the readers? Readers can either be contemplators or
participants. The small reader was a participant,
walking around to discover the smallest pieces of
information. Its trajectory was a line that creates a
67

further level of information on the visualization,
indicating the areas of interest. The position of the
readers varied inversely when they were on the
balconies, from which they were contemplators. They
were able to observe other participants from there who
were decoding not only the map, but also its usage
(see figure 6).
The public presentation of the Affinity Map was a time
for getting to know each other, but it was also a time to
make the work of the ENAC scholars publicly viewable.
Making an individual identity public is not an easy task,
and neither is having one own identity shown publicly.
In particular, two situations emerged during the ENAC
Research Day. A laboratory director did not receive the
invitation to fill out the annual report and,
consequently, the relative research group
representation was pretty empty. There was no solution
for the public visualization, but the relative data were
completed the next week and the online map was
updated. Another laboratory director had the
publication index completely empty. That was another
problem related to the data, which was solved in a few
weeks through the identification of the problem, which
was related to the data input. Both situations required
a certain sensitivity as the professors were not happy
with their public image. However, the operation of
revealing data was important for two reasons: spotting
the errors, and make individuals aware of the data they
enter or, more generally, their digital identity.

Figure 6: Readers from the balconies look at individuals on
the visualization as a form of supplementary information.
@ Alain Herzog 2016

68

Digital Floor Installations
The two case studies presented in these pages are
examples of static images. However, floor visualizations
can be dynamic and this section illustrates the different
digital installations recently produced by Obscura
Digital and Google.
Obscura Digital created a dynamic floor visualization in
2011, called Connections, for the F8 conference, which
is hosted annually by Facebook. Multiple overhead
projectors mapped a network visualization on the floor,
while a device identified few attendees who were
equipped with RFID in the projection area [19]. The
result was a dynamic network of individuals related by
their common interests in Facebook. The major feature
of this visualization is the identification of the readers,
and the resulting customization. This customization
leads the reader to information more relevant to them
through a filter on the data. However, this technology
also has some limitations. First, external viewers might
not find the information relevant that is being filtered
according to the active readers. Second, dynamic
visualizations do not offer steady references to lead the
readers as the digital representation is always different.
The same year, Google created another dynamic floor
visualization at the Pavillon de l’Arsenal in Paris. The
installation was based on Google Maps, the software
used to show the city of Paris on 37 square meters of
high-resolution screens [20]. A control station situated
at the base of the visualization allowed the reader to
pan or zoom in and out. In addition, viewers could walk
around the visualization on the catwalk that surrounded
the map. The installation was attractive because it is
rare to find a map of such size and detail. Furthermore,
the view from the catwalks was impressive, the quality

of the image was excellent, and the circulation of the
readers gave different points of view (as in the case of
the ENAC Research Day, the combination of close and
distant reading enriched the reading experience).
However, two limitations affected the installation. First,
only one person at a time could interact with the map,
making the other readers mere passive observers and,
second, a close reading was not possible as the readers
cannot walk on the visualization.
The potential of these dynamic floor visualizations is
significant, especially with the constant evolution of
technology that will allow for more seamless use. Some
of the current limitations are purely technical, like the
fact that only a few readers are able to interact
simultaneously on the map. Other limitations are
economic, for instance the need for screens, projectors,
graphic cards, software, and professionals make the
budget of dynamic visualizations very high, largely
exceeding the creation of a static walkable visualization
which remains more affordable.

Circulation of Readers and Knowledge
As previously written, it is reductive to consider a
visualization without the larger context. The reader, in
particular, is a necessary actor in this larger context in
order to make sense of a visualization. As art exists
when visitors interact with artworks [6], likewise the
reading exists when a reader interacts with a
visualization. In addition, the relationship between
reader and visualization is particularly strong when the
reader is represented in the visualization itself. The
experience of the reader, indeed, relies on the act of
self-recognition [23].

69

Walkable visualizations are situated in public
environments in order to foster participation, making
these objects not only shared [11], but above all public
[16]. This specific setting allows for social interaction,
making the visualization reading collective. Glances
move around the visualization as readers search for
their own selves in a collective performance bore by
many readers. Once a reader finds themselves, the
distance between the reader and its representation is
equal to zero. What happens next is a transformation
from self-recognition into the act of collective
recognition: the readers no longer search only for
themselves, but also for their peers. Looking at the
individuals, the reading appears as a multitude of acts
of self-recognition; looking at the whole, the reading
seems more like a crowded activity of collective
recognition. The visual representation and the
individuals are unified through the act of a collective
recognition.
The collective reading is helped, no doubt, by the size
of the visualization. Walkable visualizations are indeed
able to gather many readers on the same area in a sort
of collective interaction. However, this interaction is not
just between the visualization and the readers, but it is,
above all, among the readers who are the protagonists
of the performance.
The environment that exists around the walkable
visualization offers different affordances. The main
affordance is represented by the reading itself in which
the visualization offers its information to the readers.
However, a specific affordance of walkable visualization
is represented by the movement of the readers within
the environment. While visualizations on computer
screens oblige the reader to stay still, walkable

visualizations encourage the circulation of individuals.
The readers have to walk around in order to experience
the visualization from different points of view. This
movement is similar to the behavior of a sculptor: to
understand the volume of their artwork, the sculptor is
obliged to look at the statue from every angle.
Likewise, the circulation of the reader is a way to
assimilate the many facets of information.
However, the movement does not concern a specific
reader, but rather the collective. The trajectory that a
reader forms through their movement is part of a larger
meshwork that is similar to the pattern left by animals
on the snow [15]. The meshwork shows the usage of
the visualization through the circulation of the readers,
but, more specifically, it shows how the readers meet
each other through interactions (see figure 7).
Reading a visualization on the screen of a laptop or a
mobile phone is usually an intimate activity that the
reader performs alone [10]. Indeed, small screens
favor a one-to-one reading. However, when the size of
the media becomes bigger, as in the case of walkable
visualization, the reading becomes social. It is not just
because the size of the screen can host more users at
the same time, but also because the size makes the
screen content public and visible from longer distances
[26]. The size of the walkable visualization fosters
encounters between readers browsing the environment.
And encounters stimulate discussion among the
readers. As Philippe Starck commented on the poor
functionality of his beautiful juicer when he claimed
that it is an object that would begin discussions,
walkable visualizations may be considered spaces to
begin discussions as well. Indeed, the public dimension
of the walkable visualization is important because it
70

creates a social space. Reasoning by analogy, it can be
said that there exist three spaces: the space of the
practice where the daily work takes place, the space of
the representation that is aimed at visually
representing the practice, and the space of the selfrecognition where the readers meet and discuss both
the natural and the represented spaces.
The point of this section is that if the intimate reading
brings new insights, the social reading creates
knowledge. Assuming that knowledge is the scientific,
literary, and intellectual culture that is agreed between
specialists of the same field, the way to improve that
knowledge is a constructive discussion between these
specialists. During the two case studies the collectives
of research were both represented and invited to the
reading. It was a moment for them to realize to being
part of a larger collective through the recognition of the
single and the collective self. An open discussion is the
basis of every solid community. Data visualization, in
such cases, allows members of a collective to explore
the wholeness of their own organization, reflecting on
its current state and the following steps towards its
future. As Paul Ricoeur wrote, the self-recognition
brings forth two directions: the past and the future
[21]. The past is represented by the memories of
digital traces that have been transformed into the
visualization, while the future is represented by the
promises readers make to plan a common future.

Figure 7: Readers circulating in the environment looking at
the walkable visualization from different perspectives [5].

71

References
1.

Rudolf Arnheim. 1982. The power of the center: a
study of composition in the visual arts. University
of California Press, Berkeley, CA. Retrieved from

2.

Mathieu Bastian, Sebastien Heymann, and Mathieu
Jacomy. 2009. Gephi: an open source software for
exploring and manipulating networks. Proceedings
of the Third International ICWSM Conference.

3.

Brian Croxall. 2014. Found the @serendipomatic
team. Need to get @sekleinman and @mia_out in
one with me. Alas, @fontnerd. #dh2014. Twitter.
Retrieved January 17, 2018 from
https://twitter.com/briancroxall/status/486167328
821088257

4.

Gilles Deleuze and Claire Parnet. 2007. Dialogues
II. Columbia University Press, New York.

5.

Gérard Desargues and Abraham Bosse. 1648.
Manière universelle de Mr. Girard Desargues, pour
pratiquer la perspective par petit-pied. Imprimerie
de Pierre Des-Hayes, Paris.

6.

Marcel Duchamp. 1994. The creative act. Sub
Rosa Records, Brussels.

7.

Thomas M J Fruchterman and Edward M Reingold.
1991. Graph drawing by force-directed placement.
Software: Practice and experience 21, 11: 1129–
1164.

8.

9.

James J. Gibson. 1979. The ecological approach to
visual perception. Houghton Mifflin Company,
Boston.
Matthew K Gold and Lauren F Klein. 2016. Debates
in the Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis.

10. Edward T Hall. 1990. The hidden dimension.
Anchor Books, New York.

11. Jeffrey Heer, Fernanda B Viégas, and Martin
Wattenberg. 2009. Voyagers and voyeurs.
Communications of the ACM 52, 1: 87–11.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1435417.1435439
12. Christian Jacob. 2006. The sovereign map:
theoretical approaches in cartography throughout
history. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Retrieved from
13. Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg,
et al. 2015. Opportunities and Challenges for Data
Physicalization. ACM Press, 3227–3236.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702180
14. Bruno Latour. 2014. Anti-zoom. In Olafur Eliasson:
contact, Suzanne Pagé, Laurence Bossé, Hans
Ulrich Obrist and Claire Staebler (eds.).
15. Henri Lefebvre. 1991. The production of space.
Blackwell, Oxford; Cambridge, MA.
16. Andrew Vande Moere and Dan Hill. 2012.
Designing for the Situated and Public Visualization
of Urban Data. Journal of Urban Technology 19, 2:
25–46.
http://doi.org/10.1080/10630732.2012.698065
17. Franco Moretti. 2007. Graphs, maps, trees:
abstract models for literary history. Verso,
London; New York.
18. Donald A Norman. 2013. The design of everyday
things. Basic Books, New York.
19. Obscura Digital. 2011. Connections for Facebook.
Obscura Digital. Retrieved 2018 from
http://obscuradigital.com/work/f8/
20. Pavillon de l'Arsenale. 2011. Paris, a city in the
making. Retrieved 2018 from
http://www.parismetropole2020.com/evenement/

72

21. Paul Ricoeur. 2005. The course of recognition.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Retrieved from
http://golibgen.io/view.php?id=478848
22. Alexandre Rigal and Dario Rodighiero. 2015.
Trajectoire d'une représentation cartographique en
réseau. Cartes & Géomatique 225: 33–41.
23. Dario Rodighiero and Loup Cellard. 2016. Selfrecognition in data visualization: how people see
themselves in social visualizations. Retrieved from
https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/218454/
24. Dario Rodighiero, Frédéric Kaplan, and Boris
Beaude. 2018. Mapping Affinities in Academic
Organizations. 3: 185.
http://doi.org/10.3389/frma.2018.00004
25. Dario Rodighiero. 2015. Representing the digital
humanities community: unveiling the social
network visualization of an international
conference. Parsons Journal of Information
Mapping VII, 2.
26. Dario Rodighiero. 2018. Mapping affinities:
visualizing academic practice through
collaboration. http://doi.org/10.5075/epfl-thesis8242
27. Ben Shneiderman. 1996. The eyes have it: a task
by data type taxonomy for information
visualizations. IEEE Comput. Soc. Press, 336–343.
http://doi.org/10.1109/VL.1996.545307
28. Jonathan Swift. 1800. Gulliver's travels. J.
Wanamaker, Philadelphia; New York.

73

