Understanding
Material Representations
of Physical Activity
Rohit Ashok Khot

Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity

A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy

Rohit Ashok Khot
M.S. by Research in Computer Science

School of Media and Communication
College of Design and Social Context
RMIT University

June 2016

Declaration

I certify that except where due acknowledgement has been made, the work is that of the author alone; the work has not been
submitted previously, in whole or in part, to qualify for any other academic award; the content of the thesis is the result of work
which has been carried out since the official commencement date of the approved research program; any editorial work, paid or
unpaid, carried out by a third party is acknowledged; and, ethics procedures and guidelines have been followed.
Rohit Ashok Khot
June 2016

Abstract
Self-monitoring devices that sense and collect data about an individual’s life are
becoming increasingly common. These devices are used to gain a better understanding of
the active self and individuals use this gathered knowledge to fulfil their self-derived
health and fitness goals. Currently, self-monitoring devices mostly adopt a data-centric
view of quantifying information related to physical activity. As such, physical activity data
is presented mainly on screens in graphical or numerical formats. However, this datacentric view of representing information may cause individuals to miss out on other ways
of engaging with their own data. Embracing the possibility of affording users’ greater
interaction with their data, and fuelled by the various engagement opportunities at our
disposal through material representations and digital fabrication, this research
orchestrates new representation strategies that make use of different materials to make
physical activity data more memorable, enjoyable and fulfilling. The aim of this research
is to understand how these new forms of physical activity representations would affect
the ways in which people experience and understand their own physical activity data.
To this end, I describe the design and study of three exemplary systems that turn physical
activity data into plastic artefacts, sports drinks and 3D printed chocolates. The first
system –SweatAtoms – constructs 3D printed plastic artefacts from the measured heart
rate data of users’ physical activity. The second system – TastyBeats – creates a
personalised sports drink, transforming one’s physical activity efforts into an interactive
water fountain installation. The third and final system – EdiPulse – transforms the heart
rate data from users’ physical activity into 3D printed personalised chocolate treats.
Following “in the wild” field deployments, I investigated how these systems positively
influence the experience of being physically active, finding that key material
representation aspects can make the experience memorable, enjoyable and fulfilling.
Finally, the thesis invites future explorations in the area of material representations of
physical activity data by defining a conceptual design framework, Shelfie. Shelfie presents
key themes of designing material representations through 16 design cards.
Through three systems and the conceptual framework, this thesis contributes to the
current literature in the following ways. Firstly, this thesis extends the current
understanding on visualisations of self-monitored data through the novel approach of
material representations. As such, this work brings together three areas: personal
informatics, physical visualisation and human material interaction, in order to make the
physical activity data more enjoyable. Secondly, this thesis discusses practical
implications and challenges of designing material representations of physical activity
data, and guides future explorations through a conceptual design framework. To
conclude, this work inspires designers to consider new engagement possibilities afforded
by material representations to support the experience of being physically active.

Thank you…

Acknowledgement
Words cannot express how grateful I am to so many people who generously supported
this work. I take this opportunity to express my gratitude and respect.
I would like to start with my super enthusiastic and energetic supervisors, Florian ‘Floyd’
Mueller and Larissa Hjorth, thank you for making my PhD a truly adventurous and life“At times our own light goes
out and is rekindled by a
spark from another person.
Each of us has cause to think
with deep gratitude of those
who have lighted the flame
within us”
- Author Unknown

changing experience. I am forever in debt to you for your excellent guidance and
constant encouragement that made this work successful. Not many PhDs get to play with
‘cool’ 3D printers and chocolates, but how lucky I am, to be surrounded with several of
them - thank you Floyd. Thank you for giving me so many wonderful opportunities
throughout. Your passion and dedication towards research always inspire me. I have
learnt a lot from you in the process and I aspire to pass it on to my future students.
I am also grateful to my panel members - Stefan Greuter, Jeremy Yuille, Adam Nash, Sarah
Pink and Adrian Danks. Their different perspectives on my research and their gentle push
to do better, have encouraged me to go out of my comfort zone and discover new things.
Thank you for your guidance and constant faith in me.
I wholeheartedly thank Jeewon Lee and Ryan Pennings, with whom I have collaborated in
different phases of this work. This work was not possible without your technical
expertise. Your desire to make awesome tools have motivated me to learn new things. We
have so much to explore in the future!
Special mention to my colleagues at XGL: Ruth Sancho Huerga, Gina Moore, Robert Cercos,
Helmut Munz, Lauren Ferro, Chad Toprak and Jayden Garner with whom I have shared the
early days of my PhD. I have very fond memories of those days. Also, many thanks to Tim
Ryan, Josh Andres, Aaron Belbasis and Daniel Prohasky for sharing their artistic and
engineering skills with me - your advice really helped in making my research creative. I
also thank Sarah Jane Pell and Betty Sergeant for being there for me and constantly
encouraging me to push new boundaries. The intense discussions as well as not so
serious chats that we had gave me different perspectives on my research. Your passion
and commitment to research always inspire me. And lastly, Rich Byrne, I do not have
enough words to thank you. Thank you for putting so much efforts in editing my thesis at
the last moment, and giving me your critical feedback. It is because of you that I finally
pulled the thesis together.
A big thank you to all my friends from the Exertion Games Lab: Christopher Mackenzie,
Rakesh Patibanda, Marianna Cheklin, Will Goddard, Tom Penny, Amani Naseem and Chris
Jones. Thank you to all the visitors to the lab and reading group: Mads Moller Jensen,
Simon Stusak, David Altimira, Nadine Samaha, Elena Marquez, Niels Quinten, Wouter Walmink,
Chek Tien Tan, Stephen Barrass, Sebastiaan Pijnappel and Florian Lachner. I also thank
Jennifer Anayo, Xinru Chen and Marion Muliaumaseali’i from the Digital Ethnography
Research Centre and Gerhard Molin, Will Owen, Sven Krome, Fatima Alqahtani and Alexander
Muscat from the GEE lab. I also thank all my non-RMIT friends: Deepak, Raksha, Rekha,
Sharad, Gitansh, Sneha, Reshma, Hasan, Farhana, Fernando, Ayush, Saurabh and finally,
Gaurav Shah who unfortunately passed away this year, missing you buddy, loved sharing
tea with you. Thank you friends for being there with me, when needed. :-).

Acknowledgement
I am also grateful to the School of Media and Communication and RMIT University for
providing me with an inspirational research home. I would like to thank - Bianca Valentine,
Lisa Dethridge, Jonathan Duckworth, Janette Chantry, Lyn Wilkosz, Corliss Mui Suet Chan,
David Beesley and Suzana Kovacevic for their support. Special mention to Kelly Ryan for
“At times our own light goes
out and is rekindled by a
spark from another person.
Each of us has cause to think
with deep gratitude of those
who have lighted the flame
within us”
- Author Unknown

bringing my work to the media. I have very fond memories of my media interviews and
articles - enjoyable and breathtaking at the same time. Thank you for handling all the
media queries and allowing me to enjoy a celebrity status for a short-while. I am also
thankful to Alex Joseski, Ruwan de Silva, Alex Zemtsov and their team for making beautiful
videos of my work. Also, I gratefully acknowledge the funding received from - Exertion
Games Lab, School of Graduate Research, IBM Research, Association of Computing Machinery
(ACM) and the Australian Research Council, DP110101304. The financial support helped me
to present and attend several academic venues.
I also express my appreciation to Jennifer Lai, Chris Butler and Juerg von Kaenel from IBM
Research, Australia - for giving me the wonderful opportunity to work with you. I also
thank the colleagues to make my visit comfortable and showing great zeal in my work.
I am very appreciative to Joe Marshall, Anne Roudaut and Sriram Subramanian for hosting
me at the Bristol Interaction Group and Mixed Reality Lab, Nottingham. Thank you for
sharing your work with me and making me feel at home during my visit. Though it was a
short visit, it has a profound impact on my interest to explore exciting technologies.
I am sincerely thankful to my study participants who very enthusiastically participated in
my research. Thanks a lot for dedicating your precious time to this research.
I am also grateful to many researchers and designers who have inspired me through
their awesome works. Special mention to Kannan Srinathan, Jesse Schell, Bernie DeKoven,
William Gaver, Marc Hassenzahl, Yvonne Rogers, Deborah Lupton, Venkatesh Choppella and
Hiroshi Ishii - I have always looked up your work for inspiration.
As no work can be completed without the blessings of the loved ones, I am very
fortunate to have the most supportive and appreciative family. Mom and Dad, the ego and
glow in your eyes that I have seen for myself and for my work, have always been a
driving force for me. Your prayers for me has made me what I am today. Thank you for
always being a strong support, and extending your love even from a distance. I am also
thankful to my adorable sister, and my brother-in-law for giving me a sweet little niece,
Piku, whose laughter and mischievous activities have given me so many smiles. Thank
you for regularly sharing her videos and photographs with me. I also extend my regards
to my friends, and relatives in India for their unconditional love and understanding - your
unwavering support and confidence mean a lot to me.
And lastly, a big thank you to my sweetheart, Deepti Aggarwal. Your presence breathes
life into my existence and gives wings to my dreams. This PhD was one such dream. I
borrow Charlotte Brontë’s words to sum up, “I know what it is to live entirely for and with
what I love best on earth. I hold myself supremely blest -- blest beyond what language can
express; because I am my wife's life as fully as she is mine.”

Page 11 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Table of Contents
Chapter 1 ................................................................................................................13

Understanding
Material
Representations of
Physical Activity

Chapter 2 ................................................................................................................23
Chapter 3 ................................................................................................................31
Case Study 1 ............................................................................................................. 41
Case Study 2 ............................................................................................................. 54
Case Study 3 ............................................................................................................. 68
Chapter 7 ................................................................................................................. 83

Prepared by:
Rohit Ashok Khot
Under the supervision of:
Prof. Florian Mueller
Prof. Larissa Hjorth

All rights reserved. This book or any
portion thereof may not be reproduced
or used in any manner whatsoever
without the written permission of the
author except for the use of brief
quotations in a book review.
Cover Image © Linh Nguyen
©2016 Rohit Ashok Khot
Address
Exertion Games Lab,
RMIT University,
Design Hub Building 100 level 4
Corner of Victoria and Swanston St.,
Melbourne, Australia.
Phone
61 3 9925 2594
Email
rohit@exertiongameslab.org

Chapter 8 .............................................................................................................. 126
References .............................................................................................................. 131
Notes .................................................................................................................... 143

Page 12 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#1
Introduction

Page 13 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CHAPTER 1

Introduction
This chapter outlines and contextualises the main research question of the thesis. I define the research
objectives, scope, contributions and I conclude by describing the outline of the rest of chapters.

Introduction
With the recent advancements in sensing and wearable technologies, we are witnessing
a cultural trend towards self-monitoring, commonly discussed under the umbrella terms
of “Quantified self” (Choe et al. 2014; Neff and Nafus 2016) and “Personal informatics” (Li
et al. 2010). The central premise behind self-monitoring is the Delphic maxim: ‘know
“Art in the blood is liable to take the

thyself’, or in other words “self-knowledge through numbers”, where individuals seek

strangest of forms”

knowledge about the self in order to understand and optimise their lifestyle (Lupton

— Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

2015; Ruckenstein 2014).
Supporting this trend, various self-monitoring devices like FitbitTM1 have emerged in

1

http://fitbit.com

2

https://developer.apple.com/healthkit/

3

https://www.google.com/fit/

4

https://www.microsoft.com/microsoft-

band/en-au

recent years that sense and collect data about individual’s life and offer opportunities
for self-reflection. Prominent amongst these devices are health and fitness trackers such
as heart rate monitors and pedometers that enable tracking of heart rate and steps
respectively. These devices are becoming increasingly smaller and energy efficient
thereby allowing continuous monitoring and feedback. Moreover, earlier research
suggests that regular use of these devices can increase user motivation for physical
activity (Maitland et al. 2006; Bravata et al. 2007; Tudor-Locke et al. 2004).
As a result of this phenomenon, a lot of people are showing a keen interest in using
these devices to support their health and fitness related aims. For example, according to
a recently published survey by Ledger and McCaffrey (2014), 10% of the adult population
in the USA owns a self-monitoring device of some kind while the PEW research centre
report (Fox and Duggan 2013) indicates that 21% of Americans use some form of
technology to track their health-related data. Additionally, major companies like Apple2,
Google3 and Microsoft4 have taken a keen interest in developing platforms to support
these devices, suggesting that further proliferation in this field is expected.
The growing popularity of self-monitoring has contributed to a wider availability of
previously inaccessible physical activity data, such as an individual’s heart rate, but there
exists only a limited knowledge of how, and for what purposes, this data could and
should be used. Currently, this data is mainly used to increase awareness about an
individual’s physical activity levels and to support motivation for physical activity with a
predominant use of screens to visualise this data (Choe et al. 2014).
However, I find that the use of screens and the emphasis on quantification restrictive to
individuals’ engagement with their own physical activity data. For example, commercial
self-monitoring devices offer a comprehensive display of tracked physical activity data
using numbers and graphs as shown in Figure 1.

Page 14 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

For a person with a limited experience in data visualisations

perceivable in daylight and they demand attention whenever

and statistical reasoning, the depth of communicated

information is projected onto it.

information may appear overwhelming to generate insights
and actionable knowledge about oneself (Yang et al. 2013; Kay
2014). As such, poor representation, lack of context and an
overload of information can create confusion and
discouragement among users (Hansel et al. 2015; Choe et al.
2014). To this end, Anthropologist Ruckenstein argues in favour
of a more meaningful interpretation of data, highlighted by her
study findings, by saying,

“[…] because of the many possible
interpretations allowed by the visualisations,
it was important that they are not simply
passed on to the participants” (2014, p.9).
Secondly, earlier research by DiSalvo and Roshan (2014)
highlighted the importance of medium to support the
meaningful interpretation of the data. Following McLuhan
(1994), the authors argue for a careful selection of a medium
as it can impact the reception and interpretation of the

In addition, while on-screen visualisations offer the capacity to
stimulate our visual senses, they ignore the abundance of
other senses that can also be potentially used to enrich our
own engagement with personal data. Victor (2013) refers to
this limitation as the “picture under the glass” effect. Here
Lupton’s work (2016) on the limitation of graphic
representations of corporeal multi-sensorial experience is
insightful. Lupton notes,

“…numbers and graphs as a source of
knowledge serve to represent bodies and
selves in a very limited, impoverished way.
Compare these flat forms of data
materialisation with the complexities of the
affective embodied knowledge that is a
response to a scent, taste, or the touch of
skin” (2016, p.125).

communicated information. Existing works on self-monitoring

This problem of trying to represent the complex and multi-

predominantly use a digital medium such as a smartphone

sensorial nature of the body motivates this thesis. In particular,

screen or a desktop screen to visualise physical activity data.

this dissertation seeks to explore the role of new forms of

This digital medium has benefits in terms of providing

media and their representational potentialities to redefine how

interactive capabilities such as zooming into the data and

we understand the physical activity experience by going

updating data in real time. However, the digital medium also

beyond the screen and quantified outputs. This thesis explores

incurs some limitations as to what can be experienced with it

alternate feedback strategies to complement the current data-

(Vande Moere 2008; Victor 2013). For example, screens are less

centric view on representing data using numbers and graphs.

Figure 1: A variety of
detailed information about
a physical activity can be
overwhelming to individual
with limited statistical
knowledge.

Page 15 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Taking inspiration from the recent advancements in digital

2008) and anthropology (Miller 1987, 2008, 2010; Woodward

fabrication technology and fuelled by the various engagement

2007; Dant 1999), which signify a human fascination towards

opportunities that material representations offer, I explore

collecting and making objects. Sennett (2008) refers to

design strategies for representing physical activity data in

humans as “homo faber” – a manufacturer and collector of

different material forms. To this end, I unite three strands of

objects who imbues sentiment in external artefacts. As Miller

significant design areas, namely: Personal Informatics, Physical

(2008) notes, people can glean great feelings of comfort

Visualisation and Human Material Interaction (HMI). With this

through the meaningful role of material representations

work I offer a new interdisciplinary perspective on

within their everyday lives and as Kopytoff observes, material

understanding physical activity through material

objects have their own biographies much like people (1986).

representations.

Material objects can embody lives, personalities, emotions and

Approach: Material representations

achievements. For example, the results of one’s crafts and
awards are often displayed on fridge doors, walls and shelves.

This thesis advocates an innovative approach of representing

Photographs of trips and events are often printed, framed and

physical activity data in the form of material artefacts. By

displayed despite the fact that they could just as well be seen

material artefacts, I refer to physical objects that are

on a screen.

constructed from digital designs using a digital fabrication
process like 3D printing. I explore three distinctive materials
for constructing these artefacts: biodegradable plastic,
drinkable fluids, and food in the form of chocolate.

Arrangement of material artefacts to spatially identify an
individual is called “autotopography” (Gonzalez 1995).
Autotopography can serve as a memory landscape to the
owner, triggering reminiscence at a later point of time (van den

The use of plastic is motivated by the synergy I see between

Hoven 2004). In this work, I also capitalise on the tangible

physical activity and 3D printing. Physical activity involves the

nature of the physical medium that allows constructed

expenditure of energy, without any material gain. Whereas 3D

representations, “to be touched, explored, carried or even

printing follows an additive manufacturing process where a

possessed” (Vande Moere 2008, p.472). Vande Moere (ibid)

material artefact is created by additively depositing plastic

further argues that since material representations require time

layer by layer on a print bed. If we blend them together than it

and effort to explore and understand the embedded data, then

could lead to a “physical – digital – physical” mode of

the time can also be used to encourage people to reflect on

interaction where the physical energy of an individual is first

their behaviour, thereby yielding a more engaging and

invested to generate digital data such as heart rate, which is

educational experience for them.

then converted back again into a physical form to make a reentry into the physical world. This artefact could then serve as
a physical souvenir or testimony to invested efforts in physical
activity.

Despite these known benefits, the current exploration on
designing material representations is limited (Jansen et al.
2015). Although sports capitalise on the rewarding aspects of
material representations by rewarding an individual with

I use consumable materials such as chocolate and sports drink

physical medals and trophies on successful completion of

fluids to provoke thinking about the significant relationship

certain fitness or sports goal. These artefacts focus on

between physical activity and food, and the role of technology

objective facts and key milestones such as achieved fitness

in supporting this relationship. For instance, self-monitoring

goals. However, their design does not embody any personal

technologies typically provide data about how much energy

data and as a result they may miss out on being a

has been expended in physical activity (i.e. energy-out), while

representation of one’s active self. Although rewards are not

food printing technologies focus on ways of producing food

meant to serve as representation, there is a definite learning

that is meant for consumption (i.e. energy-in). As such, these

value in blending rewards and representations together as it

representations also contribute to the “human energy cycle”,

could lead to more meaningful and enjoyable interpretation of

where the energy invested in doing physical activity is given

one’s data. Drawing inspiration from this, this work aims to

back to the body though edible artefacts. Additionally, related

emphasise, preserve and celebrate self-monitoring experience

work around self-monitoring technologies and their

through material representations.

representations seems to indicate a lack of exploration into
“physical-digital-physical interaction” and “energy cycle”, which
I also attempt to address with this thesis.

However, in advocating the use of personal data, I am also
aware of the potential ethical and sociocultural issues that
may sneak in as highlighted by earlier literature (Purpura et al.

I ground my interest in the literature on material culture

2011; Lupton 2016). Lupton (2016) for instance, shed lights on

studies in Human Computer Interaction (HCI) (Kirk and Sellen

critical topics such as ownership and data surveillance

2010; van den Hoven 2004; Goljstein et al. 2012; Petrelli et al.

Page 16 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

whereas other works (Purpura et al. 2011; Fritz et al. 2014)

The main research question explored in this thesis is:

criticise the long term persuasive qualities of self-monitoring
devices which may rather alienate individuals from the actual
physical activity. They worry that instead of making the activity
an end in itself, it may turn into a mere means to accumulate
steps and satisfy metrics.

Personal
Informatics
Figure 2: Three design
areas: personal
informatics, physical
visualisation, and
Human Material
Interaction contribute
to the thesis.

“How do we design material artefacts that
represent one’s physical activity to affect a
person’s relationship with physical activity?”

Physical
Visualisations

Human Material
Interaction

Material
Representations

Hassenzahl et al. (2016) raise concern that in the long term,

Answering this research question is not straightforward

numbers could make exercise feel like work, and we need

because, as a designer, multiple challenges must be overcome

better, richer ways to represent this data. I agree with these

to design meaningful material representations of physical

notions and therefore aims to make self-monitoring a more

activity data. I identify the following four key challenges when

playful experience while embracing the rich qualities of living

designing for material representations of physical activity data.

an active life. For instance, instead of “boring users to death
with numbers” (Hassenzahl and Laschke 2015), I ask, what if
we turn this data into something more delightful like

Key challenge 1: Choosing the right mapping
Choosing the right data mapping is important because any

chocolate or a plastic artefact?

feedback using technology would require some level of

Fortunately, with the recent rise in the digital fabrication

about how the data should be presented to the user using

technologies, we now have a way to embed data in a material
and edible form using devices such as 3D printers and food
printers (Anderson 2010; Mota 2011). Gershenfeld (2007)
envisions that 3D printers will soon be found in every home
and people will use them to create, mix and design material
artefacts of their choice rather than buying them from the
market. Consequently, design and HCI researchers are now
investigating the role of digital fabrication in HCI (Mellis et al.
2013). This research therefore is a timely endeavour to
investigate the significance of digital fabrication for
supporting physical activity.

Thesis statement
Located within the HCI tradition, this thesis explores material

information processing from the user. Designers need to think
material representations. For example, should the mapping be
informative to give users comprehensive details into their
physical activity or should the mapping be more abstract,
making users more curious and speculative about their
physical activity? There is no definite answer in the literature
to suggest an appropriate mapping. Davis et al. (2005) argue
for a direct and informative feedback as it offers opportunities
to learn about the self and to improve the performance.
Conversely, however, Consolvo et al. (2008), argue for a more
abstract form of feedback to support positive engagement
with the data. In this thesis, I therefore explore both forms of
feedback to identify their suitability for material
representations.

representations of physical activity. It involves investigation of

Key challenge 2: Choosing the right outcome

the design space surrounding Personal Informatics, Physical

The outcome refers to the final design of the artefact, in terms

Visualisation and Human Material Interaction (HMI), as shown
in Figure 2. The aim is to understand how material
representation could affect the ways in which individuals
experience and reflect on their own physical activity, and how
this understanding could expand the conceptual foundations
and approaches to design quantified self systems.

of its form and interface. A material representation affords
many design possibilities — starting from how it looks to what
it should convey. Existing literature puts equal emphasis on
aesthetics and readability of the artefact e.g. according to
Desmet (2003) and Jorden (1997), a user will touch and engage

Page 17 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

with a product only if it looks good and feels good in the hand.

al. (2015) suggest that feedback on data should be presented

As such, aesthetics play an important part in driving the initial

at times when the user is most likely to notice it. Existing

interactions and shaping the user experience. However,

literature also does not speak about user’s involvement in the

aesthetics alone are not sufficient to sustain user engagement

creation process of the material artefact. Most often the data is

(Forlizzi et al. 2003). The aesthetics must complement a user’s

simply displayed to the user without any explicit involvement

needs and intentions, which in this case is to improve the

from the user. I see benefits to involving users in the making

understanding of physical activity. However, unlike a digital

process because material artefacts can become more valuable

medium, a physical medium offers less flexibility in embedding

by virtue of the time and emotion that the user has invested in

information. Embedding too much data can make the material

them (Petrelli et al. 2008; Kirk and Sellen 2010). Gauntlett

artefact less readable, whereas embedding little data can not

(2013) further suggests that creating an artefact can also be

serve the intended purpose. In this thesis, I therefore

an enjoyable experience as it gives individuals the feeling of

experiment with multiple forms of representations to

wonder, agency and satisfaction during the making process. In

understand their efficacy and trade-off between aesthetics and

this regard, the following questions need to be answered.

readability.

When and how should the material artefact be presented to

Key challenge 3: Choosing the right material
According to Ashby and Johnson (2010), the functionality of the
resultant artefact is dependent on the choice of material and
process to meet the technical requirements of the design.

the user? Should the process of creating material artefacts run
in parallel with the physical activity or should it be delayed
until the user finishes his/her physical activity? Should we
involve users in the creation process of a material artefact or
should we simply hand over the artefacts to the users? In this

The possibilities for choosing the material are numerous. A

thesis, I seek to answer these questions.

case in point would be that material artefacts do not have to

In summary, the interplay of the above four challenges makes

be confined to only solid-state materials like plastic or metal;
other materials that are in a liquid or gaseous state can also
be explored as a potential material for creating engaging
representations.

my PhD endeavour exciting. I explore different strategies to
address the above challenges and to gain an understanding of
the interrelationship between the different aspects of material
representation (as mentioned above) and physical activity. To

Additionally, the use of materials to represent physical activity

this end, this thesis has following research objectives.

could afford other functionalities besides visualisation. For

Research objectives

example, a durable material like plastic affords use as a
decorative piece within a home, whilst an edible material

The research objectives are described as follows.

offers new opportunities for consumption satisfying new tastes

Objective 1: Gather an understanding of the existing

and providing energy to the individual. While choosing the
suitable material for representations, designers need to
consider the underlying properties of the material, which can
be both advantageous and disadvantageous, to serve the
intended purpose. For example, a material like plastic is more
durable but may not be eco-sustainable (environmentally
friendly) while edible materials like chocolate are tasty and
tempting but they are perishable and may not last long.
Therefore, designers must strike a balance between these

literature
This thesis will first enumerate existing issues and
opportunities associated with physical activity and its
representation using self-monitoring devices by drawing upon
the previous works in the field of Personal Informatics, Data
Visualisations and HMI. It also includes related work on
different materials (plastic, food and fluids) to identify design
opportunities and strategies for this research.

qualities of the material and the intended purpose of serving

Objective 2: Explore the design space of material

as a physical representation of data. I am also keen to

representations

understand varied functionalities of material artefacts and
their relations to the user by harnessing the underlying
properties of the chosen material.

This thesis will present three design prototypes built upon the
identified design opportunities associated with selfmonitoring devices and the use of different materials to

Key challenge 4: Choosing the right process

construct material representations. These design explorations

The final key challenge is to identify the means of creating

will serve as research vehicles to develop insights into the

material representations. Selecting the right process involves
consideration about time and place, which according to Intille
(2004) are essential for effective data communication. Patel et

user experience of engagement with material artefacts of
physical activity.

Page 18 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Objective 3: Validate the design space

designed three working prototypes that explore distinctive

This objective involves empirical evaluations of the designed

materials to represent heart rate data of physical activity.

prototypes through “in the wild” deployments, where the
developed prototypes will be deployed and studied in
participants’ homes. These investigations and the insights
gained through the studies will then be utilised to develop a
conceptual understanding of how material representations can

These three prototypes are then studied individually through
in the wild deployments across different homes in Melbourne,
Australia. I have used semi-structured interviews and diaries as
the method for data collection and thematic analysis as the
method to analyse participant’s experiences with each of the

impact and shape the experience of physical activity.

systems. More details of the methods are discussed in Chapter

Objective 4: Create and validate a design framework

towards the first conceptual understanding of the

3. These deployments and investigations have guided me

The insights gained from the design and investigations of the

interrelationship between material representations and

prototypes will help to shape a theoretical design framework

physical activity, which I have framed as a conceptual design

that offers guidelines and a set of themes for interaction

framework, I call Shelfie. Below, I briefly describe each of the

designers on how to design material representations of

three case studies and the framework.

physical activity.

Case study 1: SweatAtoms

Scope

The first case study revolves around a system called

In order to address the research objectives listed above, I have

SweatAtoms (Khot et al. 2013, 2014) that transforms the heart

limited the scope of the thesis to the following aspects:
1. As a first exploration into the territory of material
representation this thesis only investigates the use of heart

rate data of physical activity into five unique 3D printed
material artefacts (refer Figure 3). These artefacts are: Graph,
Flower, Frog, Dice and Ring. Each of these five
representations captures a different

rate data for creating material artefacts. Other physical

aspect of physical activity and also

activity data such as bodily movements and physiological

offers a different utility. I have

responses such as breathing rate and skin temperature

deployed this system in six

are not considered in this work.

different homes in Melbourne,
Australia for a period of two

2. I am using 3D printing for the first and third case studies

weeks. On each day, participants

and designed a new hardware system for the second case

3D printed all five material

study. Other tools that can also create material artefacts

representations of their physical

like laser cutters are not considered in this work.
3. Being the first exploratory work on the topic of material

Figure 3: SweatAtoms

representations of physical activity, I have only looked at
three materials: plastic, drinkable fluids, and chocolate,
which I believed were worthy of investigations. However, I
am confident that other researchers can benefit from the
discussed three case studies and explore other materials to
extend this work in different dimensions.
4. This thesis does not directly seek to achieve health goals

activity. These deployments led to
many key insights, particularly
relating to the importance of

personalisation and identifying the utility and context for
material artefacts. These insights are explained in Chapter 4. I
also found that participants were initially engaged in the slow
process of creating material artefacts as it gave them time to
reflect on their data. However, their interest slowly faded
because of the fixed and detached process of 3D printing. The

such as weight loss, although positive health benefits as a

second case study therefore attempts to

result of the work are welcomed. Similarly, this work is also

improve the printing process by

not aimed at maximising individual athletic performance.

offering a drinkable artefact

Instead, this thesis focuses on supporting the physical

created from an individual’s

activity experience with an assumption that an engaging

heartbeat, and prepared as an

experience can lead to enhanced participation in physical

interactive spectacle.

activity, which in turn could lead to health benefits.

Case study 2: TastyBeats

Research methodology

The second case study is called

I have utilised Research through Design (Zimmerman et al.

TastyBeats (Khot et al. 2014) and

2007) and qualitative research practices (Roger 2012; Neuman

explores representing physical

2006) to address the research objectives of my thesis. I have

activity data as a drinkable fluid

Figure 4: TastyBeats

Page 19 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

(refer Figure 4). TastyBeats is an interactive water fountain

The intention behind creating a deck of design cards was to

installation that creates a mix of energy drinks from the

make the knowledge and the experience I gained over the last

measured heart rate data of physical activity. The use of

three years working on my PhD accessible to interaction

drinkable fluids like sports drinks to represent physical activity

designers who wish to take the field of material representation

also served an additional benefit of replenishing the loss of

forward. Rather than offering strict guidelines or strategies, the

body fluids due to physical activity. In Chapter 5, I articulate

deck of design cards acts as a catalyst to stimulate and

the experiences in designing the system as well as findings

support the divergent imaginations of designers during the

gathered through public exhibitions as well as field

ideation process.

deployments of the system in different homes. I found that the
TastyBeats system increased participants’ awareness of physical

Contributions

activity while facilitating a shared social experience of

This research contributes to knowledge on understanding

reflecting on each other’s physical activity. Moreover, the

material representations of physical activity both in practice as

prepared drink was treated as a hedonic reward that motivated

well as in theory in the following manner:

participants to exercise more. To this end, participants found

1. This thesis extends the current understanding on

both the drink and the process of creating the drink engaging.
This inspired me to explore whether the same results could be
obtained through 3D printed edible artefacts, and would
participants find the process engaging as a result of it? In
consequence, I decided to use chocolate to represent physical
activity data for the final case study.

visualising self-monitored data by presenting a novel
approach of material representations of physical activity
data. As such, this work brings together three strands of
research: Personal Informatics, Physical Visualisation and
Human Material Interaction (HMI) to make the physical
activity experience more memorable, enjoyable and
fulfilling.

Case study 3: EdiPulse
The final case study explores an appealing food material,

2. This research contributes to practice by providing

chocolate, to represent physical activity

implementation details of the design of three systems -

data. I designed and studied EdiPulse

SweatAtoms, TastyBeats, and EdiPulse. Each system presents

— a system that generates four

a different approach to designing material representations

different representations of

varied across the four dimensions: used material, mapping

physical activity from heart rate

of data into physical artefact, process of creating the

data in the form of 3D printed

artefact, and the final outcome. To this end, SweatAtoms

chocolate. In line with earlier

creates plastic based material artefacts, TastyBeats provides

studies of SweatAtoms and

a personalised sports drink based on one’s physical activity

TastyBeats, I deployed the EdiPulse

efforts, and finally EdiPulse constructs 3D printed chocolate

system in seven households for a
period of two weeks where thirteen

Figure 5: EdiPulse

participants interacted with the
system on a daily basis. The field study identified how treats as
a result of physical activity positively influenced further
participation in physical activity, and highlights participants’
interest in getting pleasurable rewards for their efforts.

Framework: Shelfie
I utilised the insights gained from
the design and evaluation of
above three systems to

3. This thesis contributes to theory by defining a conceptual
design framework, Shelfie. The framework guides designers
to explore engagement possibilities afforded by material
representations through 16 design cards, where each card
describes one key aspect of designing material
representations.
4. This work also contributes to the field of Personal
Informatics by providing an understanding of the
interrelationship between material representations and
physical activity. I provide an explanation of how different

articulate a conceptual design

characteristics of a material (e.g., taste, and durability) and

framework, Shelfie (refer Figure

how the design of material representations (e.g., abstract

6). The Shelfie framework is

and informative) can affect the physical activity experience.

presented in the form of 16
design cards that convey 16 key
concepts behind the design of
Figure 6: Shelfie

treats from physical activity data.

material representations to designers.

5. This research also contributes to the growing field of 3D
printing of food. By discussing the relationship between
food printing and self-monitoring technologies, this work
provokes thinking towards whether and how food should

Page 20 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

be quantified based on one’s physical activity. As such, this
work opens up opportunities to design future systems that
aim to support the human energy cycle through the
amalgamation of food and technology design.

Related publications
Major portions of the research presented in this thesis have
been peer-reviewed and published in academic venues. The
full paper on TastyBeats has also won the best paper
honourable mention award at CHI 2015. Additionally, this work
has also been showcased in six international academic events
that attract large audiences. TastyBeats was a finalist for the
student innovation contest at UIST 2013 and SweatAtoms was
a finalist for the student research competition at CHI 2013. I
have also presented my PhD work at two doctoral schools
(Ubicomp 2013; DIS 2014). Finally, the provocative relationship
between chocolate and physical activity gathered ample media
attention and EdiPulse was featured on Mashable, Channel 9
News, ABC news, SpringWise and PSFK among others. The
TastyBeats and EdiPulse system were finalists for the Premier’s
design awards and AAMIA awards respectively. The complete
list of publications is presented below.

Full papers
1. Rohit Ashok Khot, Josh Andres, Jennifer Lai, Juerg von Kaenel, and
Florian Mueller. 2016. Fantibles: Capturing Cricket Fan's Story in 3D.
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS '16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 883-894.
(Acceptance rate: 23%)
2. Rohit Ashok Khot, Jeewon Lee, Deepti Aggarwal, Larissa Hjorth, and
Florian Mueller. TastyBeats: Designing Palatable Representations of
Physical Activity . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’15). ACM Press (2015),
2933-2942 (Acceptance rate: 23%) (Best paper Honourable
mention award).
3. Rohit Ashok Khot, Jeewon Lee, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian Mueller.
TastyBeats: Celebrating Heart Rate Data with a Drinkable Spectacle
. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI’15), ACM Press (2015),
229-232 (Acceptance rate: 22%).
4. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian Mueller.
Understanding Physical Activity through 3D Printed Material
Artefacts. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’14), ACM Press (2014),
3835-3844 (Acceptance rate: 22%).
5. Florian Mueller, Sophie Stellmach, Saul Greenberg, Andreas Dippon,
Susanne Boll, Jayden Garner, Rohit Ashok Khot, Amani Naseem, and
David Altimira. Proxemics Play: understanding proxemics for
designing digital play experiences, In Proceedings of the 2014
conference on Designing interactive systems (DIS '14), ACM Press
(2014), 533-542 (Acceptance rate: 27%).
6. Simon Stusak, Aurélien Tabard, Franziska Sauka, Rohit Ashok Khot,
and Andreas Butz. Activity Sculptures: Exploring the Impact of
Physical Visualisations on Running Activity, In Visualisation and
Computer Graphics, IEEE, 99 (1), 2014.

7. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian Mueller. SweatAtoms:
Materialising Physical Activity. In Proceedings of The 9th
Australasian Conference on Interactive Entertainment: Matters of
Life and Death (IE '13), ACM Press (2013), Article 4.

Short papers
1. Rohit Ashok Khot, Ryan Pennings and Florian Mueller. EdiPulse:
Turning Physical Activity Into Chocolates, In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '15), ACM Press (2015),
331-334.
2. Florian Mueller, Joe Marshall, Rohit Ashok Khot, Stina Nylander, and
Jakob Tholander. Understanding Sports-HCI by going jogging at
CHI. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '15),
ACM Press (2015), 869-872.
3. Rohit Ashok Khot, Ryan Pennings and Florian Mueller. EdiPulse:
Supporting Physical Activity with Chocolate Printed Messages, In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '15),
ACM Press (2015), 1391-1396.
4. Rohit Ashok Khot. Exploring Material Representations of Physical
Activity. In Proceedings of the 2014 companion publication on
Designing interactive systems (DIS Companion '14), ACM Press
(2014), 177-180.
5. Florian Mueller, Joe Marshall, Rohit Ashok Khot, Stina Nylander, and
Jakob Tholander. Jogging with Technology: Interaction Design
Supporting Sport Activities. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '14), ACM Press (2014), 1131-1134.
6. Rohit Ashok Khot, Jeewon Lee, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian Mueller.
SweatAtoms: Understanding Physical Activity through Material
Artefacts. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
EA '14), ACM Press (2014), 173-174 (CHI 204 Video showcase
finalist).
7. Rohit Ashok Khot, Jeewon Lee, Helmut Munz, Deepti Aggarwal, and
Florian Mueller. TastyBeats: Making Mocktails with Heartbeats. In
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14),
ACM Press (2014), 467-470.
8. Rohit Ashok Khot, and Florian Mueller. Sweat-Atoms: Turning
Physical Exercise into Physical Objects, In Proceedings of the 31st
Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI EA '13), ACM Press (2013), 3075-3078.
9. Rohit Ashok Khot. Exploring the Role of Materiality in Physical
Activity. In Proceedings of 2013 ACM International Joint Conference
on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’13), Doctoral
school, 1-4.
10. Rohit Ashok Khot. Sweat-Atoms: Crafting Physical Objects with
Everyday Exercise. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '13), ACM Press (2013), 2701-2706 (Citation count:
5) (Finalist for ACM Student Research Competition).
11. Alan Chatham, Ben AM Schouten, Cagdas Toprak, Florian Mueller,
Menno Deen, Regina Bernhaupt, Rohit Ashok Khot, and Sebastiaan
Pijnappel. Game Jam, In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '13), ACM Press (2013), 3175-3178.

Page 21 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

12. Florian Mueller, Rohit Ashok Khot, Alan Chatham, Sebastiaan
Pijnappel, Chad Toprak, and Joe Marshall. HCI with Sports, In
Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '13),
ACM Press (2013), 3301-3306 (Citation count: 9).

Chapter 2 addresses Research Objective 1 by giving an

Journal articles

describes the methods I followed when conducting my

1. Florian Mueller, David Altimira, and Rohit Ashok Khot. Reflections
on the Design of Exertion Games, Games for Health Journal, 2015,
4(1): 3-7.

overview of existing works in the areas of Personal Informatics,
Data Visualisation, and HMI. The chapter also illustrates
opportunities to design material representations. Chapter 3
research throughout the PhD. As a response to Objective 2,
Chapter 4 presents the first case study in the form of
SweatAtoms. Chapter 5 describes the case study 2 in the form
of TastyBeats while Chapter 6 describes the case study 3 in the

Workshop papers & Technical reports
1. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, Deepti Aggarwal, and Florian
Mueller. Supporting Autonomy in Physical papers Activity through
Material Artefacts. In Proceedings of CHI’14 workshop on Positive
Computing, ACM Press (2014).

form of EdiPulse. Chapter 7 describes the Shelfie design
framework. Finally, Chapter 8 discusses contributions of this
research, presents future directions and offers concluding
remarks.

Thesis outline
The remainder of the thesis is organised as follows (refer
Figure 7).

Figure 7: Thesis outline

Chapter

2

Literature Review

Personal informatics, Data visualisation,
Human Material Interaction

3

Research Methodology

Research Through Design, Qualitative
methods

4

Case study 1: SweatAtoms

System, Study, Findings, Discussion

5

Case study 2: TastyBeats

System, Study, Findings, Discussion

6

Case study 3: EdiPulse

System, Study, Findings, Discussion

7

Shelfie Framework

Description, Use

8

Conclusion

Contributions, Summary, Future work

Obj. 1

Obj. 2

Obj. 3

Obj. 4

Page 22 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#2
Related work

Page 23 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CHAPTER 2

Related work
This chapter covers related work in three topics of interest, namely, Personal Informatics, Data Visualisation
and Human Material Interaction (HMI). It ends by listing two opportunities for creating and studying
material representations.

Introduction
This thesis ventures into three fields of research, namely, Personal Informatics, Data
Visualisation and HMI. In this chapter, I discuss the related work in all three areas and
how they motivate my work. I conclude the chapter with a list of opportunities
associated with durable and consumable materials to represent physical activity data. I
"The real voyage of discovery consists

begin with a brief summary of current explorations on personal informatics to

not in seeking new landscapes but in

understand its relationship with physical activity.

having new eyes."

Personal informatics tools for tracking physical activity

— Marcel Proust

Regular physical activity is a key to maintaining physical health. It offers cardiovascular
fitness benefits and reduces the risk of obesity (Haskell et al. 2007). Additionally, physical

1

http://www.polar.com/au-en

1

http://fitbit.com

3

https://www.bluetooth.com/what-is-

bluetooth-technology/bluetoothtechnology-basics/low-energy
4

https://www.thisisant.com/developer/

ant/ant-basics

exercise also boosts cognitive abilities and contributes to emotional and social wellbeing (Deslandes et al. 2009; Tomporowski 2003). Despite knowing these benefits,
people who regularly exercise are low in numbers (Pate et al. 2002; Miller 2002) and
those who do exercise only partially achieve their physical activity goals (Colley et al.
2006). As a result, health remains at risk amongst many people (Pate et al. 2002).
Fortunately, recent research suggests that personal informatics tools that increase
awareness about physical activity can motivate individuals to be more active (Maitland
et al. 2006; Bravata et al. 2007; Tudor-Locke et al. 2004).
Personal informatics are a set of self-monitoring tools that capture physiological
responses and behaviour through body-worn sensors (Li et al. 2010). These tools provide
users with an opportunity to monitor and reflect on their physical activity levels. One
commonly used personal informatics tool is a heart rate monitor (Pantzar and
Ruckenstein 2014). Heart rate monitors1 inform users about their exercise intensity by
measuring heart rate as they perform physical activity. Another widely used personal
informatics tool is a pedometer, such as the Fitbit2, that captures an individual’s daily
step count. Personal informatics tools can take different forms such as armbands,
wristbands, clip-on models and smart watches (Swan 2012). Most of them track only one
particular type of data, e.g., most heart rate monitors only track heart rate data. Some
devices like Fitbit however, offer insights into a wide range of personal data such as
sleep patterns, steps taken, and calories burned as shown in Figure 1. These devices
communicate with smartphone apps through a Bluetooth3 or ANT4 protocol, and these
apps then display the tracked data to the user. Some devices also provide an embedded
digital display that shows certain summarised information about the wearer’s physical
activity, such as current heart rate or steps taken in the day, and provide an
accompanying app for the purpose of displaying more detailed activity information.

Page 24 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Self-monitoring devices are becoming increasingly smaller,

visualisation offers insights into physical activity levels by

affordable and energy efficient, allowing continuous sensing

making them comprehensible and actionable in terms of

and feedback. A PEW Research centre study from January 2013

health-related aims. Below I have categorised the existing

(Fox and Duggan, 2013) indicates that seven in ten adults in

works based on the medium used for visualisation. I begin with

the United States keep track of certain health aspects such as

on-screen visualisations, which occupy the majority of the

their weight, diet, and exercise routine. An earlier report on

existing literature, and later describe explorations in the form

“Mobile health” (2012) also revealed that one in five

of auditory and physical visualisations.

smartphone owners in the United States have at least one
health-related app installed on their phone — diet and weight
related apps being the most popular ones (Fox and Duggan
2012). The advent of smart watches, along with the increased
focus of companies on developing platforms to support
different functionalities for these devices, suggests that there

On-screen visualisations of physical activity data
In this mode of visualisation, the tracked data is mapped to
pixels on a computer screen or device. On-screen visualisation
allows representation of both heterogeneous and multiple
datasets at the same time, and also supports interactive

is likely to be further proliferation in this field.

explorations of the data such as dynamic filtering and precise

As data is becoming an integral part of people’s everyday life, a

become popular amongst expert users in work-related settings

huge amount of effort is being invested in developing
personal informatics tools and applications (Swan 2012).
Numerous studies have also surfaced that investigate the use
of personal informatics tools in an everyday context (Rooskby
et al. 2014; Fritz et al. 2014; Li et al. 2011; Choe et al. 2014;
Lazar et al. 2015). On one hand, these works highlight the
benefits of encouraging health related goals through different
strategies such as creating awareness, providing constructive
feedback, encouraging personalised goals, and by encouraging
social interactions (Klasnja et al. 2011). But on the other hand,
these works also pinpoint challenges and issues that
individuals encounter in having sustained use of these devices
(Lazar et al. 2015, Rooskby et al. 2014). These studies suggest
that existing devices place the emphasis more on data
collection than on assisting users in gaining a better

searches. As a result, virtual visualisation techniques have
and are widely used in a variety of domains for interpreting
complex data (Van Wijk 2005). However, on-screen
visualisation is mainly suitable for creating 2D representations
of data since onscreen 3D visualisations suffer from issues
related to occlusion, distortion and navigation (Shneiderman
2003). Other disadvantages of virtual visualisation, as listed by
Vande Moere (2008), include the need to have a flat display
surface, difficulty in perceiving on-screen data in daylight and
task obstruction because of the demand for visual attention. In
summary, Vande Moere (2008) suggested that virtual
visualisations have greater use for advertising and as a
reminder tool, while they are less suitable for contemplation
and reflection. Existing literature put forward following ways
in which physical activity data can be displayed on screens.

understanding of their active self through reflection of the

Representing data using numbers and graphs

collected data (Elsden et al. 2015; Lupton 2015).

The most commonly used method for representing physical

Interestingly, most of the data measured by these devices are
abstract in nature and does not hold any one-to-one
relationship with real world objects (Edward et al. 2010). As a
result, creating an appropriate visual mapping of the tracked
data using data visualisation techniques becomes crucial. In
response, a variety of works in both academia and practice
have explored different data visualisation techniques. In the
next section, I explore such techniques in depth.

Data visualisations to understand tracked data
Visualisation is very central to our understanding of data.

activity data on screen is through the use of numbers, charts
and graphs (refer
Figure 8). The
advantage with
numbers is that
they require a
small display
space and they
are easy to
interpret (Van
Wijk 2005).

“Seeing” makes knowledge credible (Bloch 2008) and “greater
visibility of information puts an added responsibility to act” (Viseu
and Suchman 2010, p.163). According to Card et al. (1999),
visualisation is useful to make sense of data by identifying
patterns and relationships within the data and then to create
or discover concepts and ideas that were previously unknown
or only hypothesised. Within the context of physical activity,

Figure 8:
Numbers and
graphs are
commonly used
to represent
physical activity
data

Page 25 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

However, interpreting numbers can become difficult with an

animated fish. The animated fish grows in size and also

increased amount of tracked data. Graphs, on the other hand,

becomes happy or sad based on how many steps the user has

are easier to glance at but identifying accurate values for

taken throughout the day. The study findings highlighted that

specific intervals can be difficult (Yi et al. 2007). As a solution,

participants did not want to look at the fish when they were

some commercial applications such as RunKeeper1 have used

inactive because they knew their sedentary activity would have

a combined approach of numbers and graphs and made them

made the fish sad. These works therefore suggest that care

interactive, where a user can hover over a particular point in

must be taken in how the visualisations are displayed to the

the graph and find the corresponding numerical value.

user because negative framing of the data might upset the

Nevertheless, the task of interpreting the statistical

user as seen in earlier example.

information is often left to the users. Ironically, different
studies indicate that most users are not very skilled at
interpreting statistical data (Ancker and Kaufman 2007;
Galesic and Garcia-Retamera 2011). To them, the accumulated
numerical data might appear overwhelming to generate new
insights or actionable knowledge. Lazar et al. (2015) report in
their study that participants rather preferred some form of
simple report card that tells them how good they have
performed. Addressing this, various works within HCI have
looked into alternate ways of summarising the captured data, I

Representing data in abstract form
Similar to living metaphors, researchers have also explored
abstract visualisation techniques to make people aware of
their sedentary lifestyle and prompting them to be more
physically active. Anderson et al. (2007), for example,
developed “Shakra”, a system which represents users’ physical
activity using a GSM cell signal icon. In a study of “Shakra", the
authors found that abstract visualisations encouraged
reflection and increased motivation for achieving high physical

briefly mention some of the key works below.

activity levels. In a similar vein, Fan et al. (2012) designed and

Representing data using living metaphors

physical activity data inspired from informative art as shown in

studied Spark that offers various abstract visualisations of

Existing works within HCI have looked at representing data

Figure 9. They found that

using living metaphors such as animated fish (Lin et al. 2006).

people have different tastes

Unlike charts or graphs, living metaphors are believed to be

when it comes to

more engaging, motivating and easy to interpret (Lin et al.

appreciating and relating to

2006). Additionally, the underlying idea is that users will

abstract visualisations.

develop an
empathy with
these virtual
living organisms,
and therefore, will
get motivation to
exercise more.
Consolvo et al.
(2008) designed a
system called
“Ubifit" garden
that uses the home screen on a smartphone to
display physical activity as a visual representation of
a garden. The flowers in the garden grow and shine
when users perform different physical activities. In a
study of “Ubifit" garden, Consolvo et al. (2008) found
that the garden-based display helped participants in
better maintaining their physical activity levels,
reporting that participants were motivated to make
the virtual flowers grow and shine. Another related
system is “Fish’n’Steps” (Lin et al. 2006), in which an
individual’s step count is mapped to the size of an

1

http://runkeeper.com

Figure 9: Screenshots of Spark
that show abstract visualisations
of step count.
Images © Chloe Fan.

Page 26 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

In another system called “QS Spiral” (Larsen et al. 2013), the

study, EdiPulse also explore textual feedback in the form

periodic properties of measured personal data are captured

Slogan.

using spiral time-series based visualisations, which allow
recurring patterns to emerge. These works suggest that while
designing abstract visualisations, it is important to pay

Physical visualisations of physical activity data
Jansen et al. (2013, p. 2594) define physical visualisations as

attention to users’ personal preferences to avoid disinterest.

“visualisations that are made of physical matter”. Physical

Representing data using text

material, which makes the visualisation easy to explore,

visualisations benefit from the physical modality of the

Systems like Jawbone Up2 and “Health Mashup” (Bentley et al.

handle, and manipulate in physical space. The use of physical

2013) provide textual feedback on the correlations formed

matter is particularly motivated by the existing knowledge of

within the self-monitored data set. For example, text-based

its affordances, and opportunities of embodiment (Vande

feedback could be of the form: “this weekend, you walked 30%

Moere and Patel 2010). While traditional digital visualisations

further than your average walking on weekdays”. Similarly,

are limited to the visual sense, physical visualisation offers

systems like “Houston” (Consolvo et al. 2006) acknowledge

numerous opportunities for interactions where the material

progress towards set goals and congratulate users with

properties such as texture, temperature and weight can

gratifying messages like “you broke your previous record of

provide different information about the artefact. The

jogging”. Accompanying studies of these works illustrate that

popularity of physical visualisations in various settings such as

textual feedback on physical activity can increase awareness

art installations and museums (Dragicevic and Jansen 2012)

and motivation for physical activity.

further suggests that physical visualisations have the potential

Representing data through play elements
Prior works have explored is the use of Gamification
(Deterding et al. 2011) to make physical activity playful.
Examples of such system include “A Step Ahead”3 and
“Zombies, Run!”4 — story-based jogging apps that, for example,
encourage users to jog in order to escape a zombie apocalypse.
Berkovsky et al. (2008) created a system called “Play, Mate!”
where marbles move in the digital 3D world towards a goal as
players move their body. “Heart Burn” (Stach et al. 2009) is a
digital car racing game where the real-time heart rate values
define the car speed in the game, while Tennet et al. (2011)
explored using breathing to control a game. Oliveira and
Oliver (2008) developed a mobile app, “TripleBeat” that allows
runners at different location to compete for achieving a target
heart rate zone during a run. Finally, Walsh and Golback (2014)
have converted user’s steps to a currency, which can be spent
within an online explorer game. Fogg (2002) worked on a
similar gamification idea, where a user’s step count is turned
into game points, which help a virtual “Pikachu” to grow. These
works highlight that introducing play elements can make
exercise both more enjoyable and engaging.

to engage people for a longer duration and sustain their
interest in exploring and understanding the represented data.
Creating physical visualisations has several challenges. Some
of these challenges include a significant production cost, slow
development process, and the fact that material artefacts offer
a static mode of interaction (Jansen et al. 2013). These
shortcomings have started to diminish with the availability of
digital fabrication techniques (Mota 2011) and
computationally augmented interfaces (Ishii et al. 2012;
Rasmussen et al. 2012). For example, devices like 3D printers
and laser cutters have made the fabrication process easier and
cheaper. Additionally, since these devices are also getting
cheaper, more accurate, smaller and faster with time, frequent
use of these devices in everyday life is expected in the near
future (Andersen 2010). Physical visualisations are constructed
in following ways.

Representing data as data sculptures
One popular type of physical visualisations is the data
sculpture. Zhao et al. (2008) define data sculptures as “data
based physical artefacts, possessing both artistic and functional
qualities that aim to augment a nearby audience’s understanding

These works have inspired me to consider both abstract and

of data insights and any socially relevant issues that underlie

playful design representations within my work. I have utilised

it” (ibid, p. 343). Within HCI, “Breakaway” by Jafarinaimi et al.

three living metaphors - Flower, Emoji and Frog across three

(2005) is one of the first works in which a data sculpture is

case studies conducted as part of the thesis. The final case

used as an ambient visualisation to provide feedback on the
proper sitting posture of the user. In a similar vein, Haller et al.

2

http://jawbone.com/fitness-tracker/up3

3

http://www.astepaheadchallenge.com/a-step-ahead-zombies

4

http://zombiesrungame.com

Page 27 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

(2011) and Hong et al. (2015) use flower-shaped
physical ambient avatars to increase the awareness
of incorrect body postures. Stusak et al. (2014)
designed and studied 3D printed representations of
running data (refer Figure 10) while Lee et al. (2015)
created a “Patina Engraving System” that represents
physical activity data through engraved patina like
patterns on a wristband. These works report that
physical visualisations support individual’s selfexpression and reminiscence, besides increasing
awareness of physical activity. In addition to these
academic works, Dragicevic and Jansen (2012) curate
an extensive list of existing explorations in physical
visualisations on ‘dataphys.org’ website. The majority
of the discussed works on this website, however has
been art projects with no empirical studies.
most of these visualisations.

Human Material
Interaction

Representing data through augmented interfaces

Over the years, human

Additionally, physical activity data has not been the focus of

There are also some works that combine physical and digital
visualisations using augmented interfaces. For example,
Mauriello et al. (2014) display running data on the back of a
runner’s T-shirt using e-ink screens, while Walmink et al. (2014)
augmented helmets with LED lights to display a cyclist’s heart
rate data as they rode. Zhang et al. (2013) created augmented
reality glasses that display potential UV damage to the skin
while cycling. Pels et al. (2014) designed “Fatbelt" that shows
consequences of overeating through inflating a waist worn
device. Other researchers (Taylor et al. 2013) have used a
mirror metaphor to make users aware of their posture. For
instance, if the user is not sitting in a proper posture then the
on-screen mirror becomes blurry, thereby encouraging the user
to sit in the correct posture. Lim et al. (2011) created
“Pediluma”, a shoe worn pedometer that provides light based
feedback about an individual’s physical activity through
varying intensities of light on the shoe.
Above physical visualisation techniques focus on improving
the user’s understanding through the tactile experience of
handling data presented in physical form (Stusak et al. 2016).
However, existing literature on material culture informs us
about the polyvalent values of material artefacts within our
everyday life, and how it shapes our identity within personal
and social contexts (Jung et al. 2011; Miller 1998). As such,
physical visualisations should not be looked at purely as
visualisations but also as substances to enrich our interaction
with materials and artefacts. This thesis unveils the distinct
pattern and importance of our interactions with each material.
I call this interaction: Human Material Interaction, which I
cover in more detail in the next section.

Figure 10: Activity Sculptures
creates 3d printed
representations of running data.
Image © Simon Stusak

material interaction has been
explored in different ways,
such as: tangible bits (Ullmer and Ishii 2000), computational
composite (Vallgarda and Redstorm 2007), organic user
interfaces (Holman and Vertegaal 2008), transitive materials
(Coelho et al. 2009) and inspirational bits (Sundstrom et al
2011). Anthropologists like Miller (1998) describe such
interactions as “Materiality” and define them in terms of a
broad range of values and affects that are elicited during the
course of making and using the artefacts. Although the current
understanding of materiality is partially biased towards
physical and functional aspects of artefacts, researchers have
recently started exploring the affective and experiential
qualities of materials that define how individuals domesticate
and make use of these artefacts in everyday settings (Jung et
al. 2011). Materials are an important part of our life. We
express ourselves not only through our appearance, but also
the way we decorate our surroundings. For example, we
demonstrate our family affection and sense of belonging by
decorating walls of our living rooms with photographs from
different life events. Additionally, our social interactions also
revolve around food, drinks, and physical artefacts.
Given the availability of computing technologies, I am
particularly interested in exploring how engaging with
different materials may influence the overall experience of
being physically active. For instance, learning from digital
metaphors for representing physical activity data, what values
would a physical metaphor add to the overall experience? Can
the physical activity become more meaningful if
representations help users to talk about their active self using
materials like plastic? Can we make physical activity more

Page 28 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

valuable by using materials that are essential for living e.g.,

personalised material artefacts. The unique pattern that the

water? Or can we make physical activity more cherishing or

resultant material artefact bears may hold more meaning to

enjoyable by exploring materials with which users share

the individuals as it becomes a personalised souvenir or

special affection e.g., chocolate? To this end, this thesis

testimony to their invested effort in being physical active

explores material representations of physical activity data

(refer Figure 11). This thesis attempts to capture these nuances

using both durable and consumable materials, which I discuss

in the design of material artefacts by focusing on less known

below.

information (such as heart rate data) and making the design

Opportunity with durable materials
According to the Goal Setting theory (Locke and Latham 1990),
incentives are important to sustain a user’s interest in a
physical activity. Following this, previous works in the field of
HCI have looked at virtual rewards and incentives to support
physical activity experience. For example, the use of virtual
rewards, points, leaderboards and badges are popularly used to
encourage users towards achieving their health goals (Bravata
et al. 2008; Walsh and Goldsmith 2014). A study by Munson and
Consolvo (2012), however, suggested that physical rewards are
more cherished and meaningful than virtual rewards. For
example, badges and trophies won in different competitions
are always more cherished than 10,000 virtual points.

more speculative rather than informative.
This thesis also builds upon the existing work on slow
technology (Halnas and Redstrom 2001) that emphasises the
need for thinking about reflection and contemplation in
opposition to efficiency and performance while designing
technology for everyday use. Interestingly, recovering and
gaining personal health is also a slow and steady process,
which demands time and consistency in the effort from the
user (Weinberg and Gould 2006). For example, the result of
burning body fat through exercise is only visible after the user
has followed the exercise regularly and for a sufficient amount
of time. Therefore, I believe that there is an opportunity to
support the slow and steady nature of improving health by

Similarly, people collect and archive souvenirs from different

creating tools that support slow and steady reflection.

trips and events to cherish their memories afterwards. These

In this thesis, I explore this opportunity through digitally

artefacts when put on display become a public representation

fabricated material artefacts that afford reflection through

of the self (Goffman 1959). As such, material artefacts are more

their inherent tendency of disappearing in the background

valuable than digital objects because of their higher visibility

(Miller 2008); where material artefacts gather attention only

in the surroundings and low replication possibility (Golsteijn et

when users specifically look at them. Additionally Kirk et al.

al. 2012; Kirk et al. 2011). In response, this research explores

(2011) argued that material artefacts also have personal

different forms of real world material rewards that are

reflective value and therefore, using material artefacts to

constructed using the measured physical activity data of

represent physical activity data can provide users with options

individuals, making them both unique and personalised.

for reflection on

I draw on the fact that bodily responses to physical activity,

their performance.

such as heart rate values, are not only different for each
individual, but also vary based on different types of physical

Figure 11: With 3D printing and durable
materials lies an opportunity of creating
personalised material rewards.

activity. Moreover, these bodily responses to exertion are
personal, non-reproducible and a good indicator of the
amount of effort and time invested by an individual in
performing physical activities. However, these nuances
within physical activities are not easily noticeable. Although
personal informatics tools can measure these nuances, they
do not put any emphasis on doing so. For example,
commercial pedometer based systems like Fitbit mark
10,000 steps in a day as a significant achievement but
ignore personal and contextual details that fuelled that
outcome. What made the person take 10,000 steps on that
particular day? What was the walking pattern for that day?
Was there anything novel in the walking pattern on that day?

In the first case study (described in Chapter 4), I have designed

These contextual and personal inferences are essential to

five different 3D printed material representations of physical

sustain engagement (Li et al. 2011; Epstein et al. 2014), but are

activity, each exploring a different aspect of physical activity.

not always captured by existing systems. I believe that these

For example, the Dice model (Khot et al. 2014) was specifically

nuances can be better acknowledged by designing

created to highlight the amount of time a user has been

Page 29 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

sedentary. Conversely, the Flower model captures the variations

When it comes to relating food to health, the majority of

in the heart rate on particular day that could signify how

existing works are centred around dietary monitoring. For

eventful (physically active or stressful) that day was in

example, Mamykina et al. (2008) created a system to track

comparison to other days.

eating habits using a mobile phone and a glucose meter.
Likewise, Siek et al. (2006) created a food journal that allows

Opportunity with consumable materials
Food has a rich cultural and social history. Its preparation, as
well as consumption, provides opportunities for bonding and
interaction among individuals (Lupton 1998; Grimes et al.
2008). French gastronome Brillat-Savarin (2015) notes that
pleasures associated with eating and drinking constitute some
of the life’s most enjoyable experiences. In recent years, the
field of “Human Food Interaction” (HFI) is gaining currency
within the HCI community with a focus on understanding
existing food practices (Comber et al. 2014). For instance,
researchers are looking into different aspects of our
interactions with food, i.e., how we grow (Lyle et al. 2013), shop
(Reitberger et al. 2014), cook (Paay et al. 2015), eat (Hupfeld
and Rodden 2012; Ohara et al. 2012) and dispose of food

participants to scan the barcodes of the foods they are having
for a particular meal. “MyFitnessPal”5 is a popular smartphone
app that counts calorie intake through the manual recording of
consumed food. Similarly, work by Fortmann et al. (2014)
quantifies the amount of water a user is drinking in a day and
provides reminders to drink more if necessary. “ The Chocolate
Machine” (Kehr et al. 2012) is a system that dispenses
chocolate at scheduled intervals, challenging a user’s patience.
Apart from these works, researchers (Spence and PiquerasFiszman 2013; Comber et al. 2014) speculate on various
interaction possibilities with food in the near future and desire
more seamless integration of food and technology design. The
recent development in devices such as food printers is a step
towards achieving this dream (Schoning et al.

(Ganglbauer et al. 2015).

2012).

Food is not only a fundamental

This thesis explores the potential of food-

pleasure that we interact with in

based representations through the use of

everyday life, but it is also an essential

drinkable fluids and chocolate as materials to

part of the human energy cycle. In the

support the physical activity experience.

context of physical activity,

Consequently, I have developed and studied

introducing food-based

two systems, TastyBeats and EdiPulse that

representations of physical activity

respectively provide an appetising drink and

data can unveil new design

chocolate treats to celebrate the experience

opportunities. The amalgamation of

of being physically active. These case studies

food and technology design breaks the

are discussed in greater detail in Chapters 5

notion of physical activity data merely

and 6 of this thesis.

consisting of unintelligible numbers,

Conclusion

and affords a new way of presenting
the data. For instance, physical activity
data is a unique and personal outcome that
reflects the amount of energy expended
and efforts invested by the user - which I
believe should be emphasised. I see self-

Figure 12: With consumable
materials lies an opportunity of
replenishing the loss of energy
and to positively reinforce
active lifestyle.

monitoring and food printing technologies

In this chapter, I presented existing
approaches that attempt to support the physical
activity experiences through different
visualisation methods including on-screen,
auditory and physical visualisations. Through the
literature review, I identified two opportunities to

as an intriguing blend, where self-monitoring tools inform us

design material representations that aim to enrich the

about how much energy has been expended in the physical

experience of physical activity through human material

activity (i.e., energy out), while food printing technologies

interactions. To leverage on these opportunities, this research

support new ways of producing food for consumption (i.e.,

leans towards research through design practice (Zimmerman

energy in). For example, after intense physical activity sessions

et al. 2007; Koskinen et al. 2011) where I develop and evaluate

causing loss of body fluids and energy, sports drinks help in

three research prototypes exploring three different materials -

recovering lost body fluids (Sawka et al. 2007) (refer Figure 12).

plastic, drinkable fluids, and chocolate. These prototypes are
discussed individually in three chapters.

5

http://www.myfitnesspal.com

Page 30 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#3
Research Methods

Page 31 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CHAPTER 3

Research Methods
This chapter presents the research methods that I have used to answer my research question.

Introduction
This thesis includes the design and evaluation of three design prototypes that serve as
research vehicles to understand user experience with material representations. In this
chapter, I present a variety of research methods that I have used to answer my research
question. I will start the chapter by describing the Research through Design
“Methodology should not be a fixed

(Zimmerman et al. 2007) approach that I have taken to design the three prototypes

track to a fixed destination but a

discussed in the thesis. I then describe the field deployments and qualitative research

conversation about everything that

methods that I utilised to understand the user experience with each prototype. Later I

could be made of happen”

describe the need of having frameworks to guide future explorations, particularly design

— JC Jones, Design Methods

cards, that are useful in generating design knowledge.

Approach: Research through Design
Research through Design (RtD) is increasingly practiced across engineering-informed
and art-based design research (Krogh et al. 2015, p.39). It is a reflective practice of
examining the process, invention, relevance and extensibility of the design through
prototyping (Zimmerman et al. 2007). This approach helps interaction designers to
integrate theoretical models with the technical opportunities demonstrated by the
design engineers, allowing for the creation of the right artefact. Zimmerman et al. (2007)
suggest that this is a step towards transforming the world from its current state to a
preferred state. According to Lowgren (2013, p.31), “the essence of research is to produce
knowledge while the essence of design is to produce artefacts.” Building on this sentiment,
the knowledge in Research through Design is in the production of the artefact or the
artefact itself (Zimmerman et al. 2007). However, unlike traditional design practices,
where artefacts and systems are designed to make specific cultural and economic
impact, in Research through Design, artefacts are designed and used as objects of
inquiry into a probable future (Gaver et al. 2004). Research through Design is also an
attempt to understand the artefact’s relationship with people in a given context
(Fallman 2003). As such, the design of artefacts is driven by the main research question
and not by the user needs (Frens 2006). To this end, Research through Design involves
explorations into how and why people interact with design artefacts (Koskinen et al.
2011;Fallman 2003).
van den Hoven et al (2007) considers Research through Design as a form of action
research. Archer (1995, p.6) defines action research as “systematic investigation through
practical action calculated to devise or test new information, ideas, forms, or procedures to
produce communicable knowledge”. He highlights the difficulties in translating the
findings from “situation specific” action research to a wider context. He therefore
encourages design practitioners to position themselves in opinion and theory
concerning the specific domain to which they are contributing and refrain from
generalising the gained knowledge to a wider domain.

Page 32 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Frens however points out the dissimilarities between Research
through Design process and prototype testing (Frens 2006). As
such, many researchers argue that the research contribution
should not solely be in terms of the produced design artefacts,
but it must be complemented by critical insights, reflected as
design specifications or guidelines for future products within
the specific context (Koskinen et al. 2011; Gaver et al. 2012).

User Experience
User experience (UX) refers to the experience of users of a
technology. UX is defined as a subjective, situated and dynamic
encounter of a person with a product, system or service
(Hassenzahl and Tractinsky 2006). They defined UX as the
result of user’s internal state (such as perceptions,
expectations, motivation, and mood), characteristics of the

According to Zimmerman and Forlizzi (2008), there exist two

product (such as usability, functionality, and purpose), and the

methodological approaches for conducting Research through

context (such as organisational and social setting) within

Design. The first approach is a philosophical one, where

which the interaction occurs. User’s experience with a product

researchers investigate “previously articulated theory through

will depend on their motivation to achieve specific goals with

the process of making”. The second is through a grounded

the product, how they anticipate the use of product, and later

approach, where researchers focus on “real world problems by

how the product fulfils their expectations. Users have an

making things that force a concrete framing of the problem”. In

abstract definition of what they want in the interaction. Most

this thesis, I lean towards the second approach — seeking

of the time, they are not vocal about their needs and they base

knowledge which is, in turn, grounded in data. Cross (2001)

their opinion on what they see and understand at the

suggests that a key research question to explore in Research

particular moment of interaction (Sanders and Williams 2001).

through Design experiments is “How would you design an <X>?”

Additionally, previous encounters with similar systems, past

This thesis asks:

memories, expertise abilities and other preferences, also
influence user’s opinion about a system (Azzawi 2014;

“How do we design material artefacts that
represent one’s physical activity to affect a
person’s relationship with physical activity?”
As discussed in Chapter 1, I divide this question into four subquestions to aid the design of material representation:

Hassenzahl and Tractinsky, 2006).
Evaluating UX with a given product provides an understanding
of the types of user interactions that a system should support
to accomplish a given task in specific situations of use. Several
frameworks and theories have been proposed to understand
the complex and subjective notion of UX (Azzawi 2014). To

1) Mapping: How should you translate physical activity data

begin with, Karapanos et al. (2009) talk about the temporality

into a material artefact?

of user experiences i.e., how user experience with a product

2) Outcome: What should that material artefact look like and
how should it feel?
3) Material: What kind of material should you use to create
such material artefacts?
4) Process: What kind of process should be followed in creating
these material artefacts?
To answer these questions, I began by following the Research
through Design approach where I designed three systems to
represent physical activity data through material artefacts. The
three prototypes use heart rate data of physical activity as a
central design element and explore different mappings,
materials, processes, and outcomes of material representations.
To investigate how the developed systems will affect physical
activity experience, I utilised in the wild field deployments
where I deployed each system individually at different
households. During each deployment, I aimed to understand
the user experience with the developed system as described
next.

develops over time. For instance, a new release of iPhone
creates a huge hype, but the phone is also appreciated over
long run. Several questions get raised here: what do users like
in the phone? is it mostly the initial excitement that motivates
the prolonged use? How important is the user familiarity with
the product? Does with learning, the product become more
useful? What is the journey of user adopting the product? The
authors suggested to use methods such as day reconstruction
and experience narration, to understand participants’ both
satisfactory and unsatisfactory experiences with the product.
On the other hand, Forlizzi and Battarbee (2004) describe how
experience transcends from unconscious to a conscious state
and contribute to form a memorable and communicable
interaction, “an experience”. “An experience” is episodic in the
way that it has a beginning, middle and end e.g., watching a
movie. An experience can be articulated or named. They further
explained user experience in social context, i.e., how the
experience of an individual gets influenced by the physical or
virtual presence of others, they call as ‘co-experience’. For
example, playing a Kinect game with friends will form coexperience with Kinect. They further explained that social

Page 33 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

interaction with other people and surroundings can influence

As such, field deployment is a step prior to bringing the system

our emotions with the products and may alter the meaning of

in real use by understanding the generalisability of findings

“an experience” from pleasant to unpleasant and vice-versa. If

beyond the study environment.

the product allows an easy way to perform some activities, the
interaction becomes pleasurable; whereas any interruptions on
the way result in unpleasing experience.

Unlike a traditional lab based experimental studies, field
deployment is time and resource intensive but provides a
richer understanding of how the user interaction with

McCarthy and Wright (2004) based their framework on the idea

technology happens, and how users adopt, use, or abandon the

that experience is a process that keeps on evolving and

technology in real world context. With the growing interests

unfolding. Thus, the relationship between users and

towards ubiquitous computing, interaction designers and

technology should be interpreted in terms of “felt life”, where

researchers are relying upon field deployments to design

felt life refers to the “emotional and sensual quality of

technologies and interaction for everyday context. For instance,

experience”. They defined six processes from anticipation to

Toprak et al. (2013) created a game called “Cart-Load-O-Fun” to

reflection to recounting that helps the user in making sense of

engage commuters in a social playful experience in a public

the given product. Lastly, Hassenzahl (2004) suggested beauty

tram. This game could have been tested in a laboratory setting,

and goodness that helps in evaluating the quality of given

as lab setting offers easy control over the study parameters

product. According to him, goodness is affected by pragmatic

such as space and players interaction. Setting up the game in a

aspects i.e., usefulness and usability. While, beauty provides a

real world tram allowed authors to gain useful insights such

social aspect of identification i.e., the product ability to

as: 1) perception of time changed when players (commuters)

address the need of self-expression.

were engaged in the gameplay. For example, some commuters

In this thesis, I particularly, utilise the framework of Forlizzi
and Battarbee (2004). I aimed to understand how user
experience the three developed systems for physical activity as
“an experience”, and how their experience evolve as “co-

did not realise when they crossed one zone and reached
another. 2) Movement of tram affected the gameplay. Such
deeper insights would not have been possible with lab-based
study.

experience” in social context. I gathered a rich set of

Field deployments can be conducted in three ways as

information from participants around the four essential

summarised by Siek et al. (2014). First is the convenience

aspects of the research question, namely, mapping, outcome,

sampling where the new technology is deployed within one’s

material and process. In particular, I explored user experience

own convenient social network such as family, and lab mates.

with the developed systems by understanding their personal

Here, the study environment is known, and hence maintaining

aspects such as motivation, preferences; interactions with the

the system is simpler. However, such a sampling is not

system and with other people around; physical environment

considered as a representative of real users of the new

for the interaction; and interactions with the given material

technology, and may provide favourable yet biased feedback to

representations. Since user experience is best understood with

the research. Secondly, semi-controlled studies involve

time-based investigations in real or realistic context of use, I

participants who know the research team and those who are

have utilised field deployments to study their interactions with

unknown to the team during the start but become familiar

system in real setting, i.e., home. In each deployment, I have

with time. As the relationship between the participants and

utilised qualitative methods to gather a rich understanding of

researcher tends to grow with time, this also brings the similar

their experience, that I describe later in the chapter. Below I

issues of acquiescence biases and lack of generalisability as

briefly give an overview of field deployments.

the first one. And lastly, in the wild study implies deploying the

Field Deployments

prototype in an almost naturalistic environment with
participants being unknown to the research team; and hence

Field deployment is a method of investigating the use of

are considered to be more critical about the prototype. The

system in real world situation with real users (Siek et al. 2014;

prototype must be robust enough to withstand the abuses and

Rogers 2011). It enables researchers to evaluate the

criticism of the participants.

interaction among multiple factors such as given technology,
target population, activities and tasks simultaneously, while
studying the context of use. Field deployment also provides an
iterative approach to study a prototype, which involve
redefining the research questions, improving the study design,
changing the prototype, and lastly reporting the findings of the
interactions with the prototype to inform future innovations.

The key aspect of this research is to study and understand how
the proposed prototype gets integrated into the everyday
experience of physical activity, and what potential benefits it
can offer to users aiming to achieve their health goals. I
followed the reflective “in the wild” study method (Rogers
2011; Chamberlain et al. 2012) to investigate the user

Page 34 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

experience with developed systems in real setting, i.e., at

construct a recipe that is right for the occasion. That is the one

participant’s home. In the wild field studies are derived from

that addresses the purpose of the study while working with

ethnographical and anthropological practices that include

available resources”. Qualitative research therefore, demands

field observations, note taking, interviews as well as audio

creativity where the researcher needs to go to the depth of the

recording that are later synthesised for detailed analysis.

context by making sense of the complex data.

However, unlike the traditional ethnographical practices, “in
the wild” studies when combined with Research through
Design practices allow the liberty of explicit interventions. For
instance, a design artefact is created and introduced in a
context to understand its subsequent effects (Gaver et al.
2004). I particularly, followed semi-structured interviews to
collect the data, which I describe next. This research also
involves “Domestication Theory”, first defined by media
scholars (Silverstone and Hirsh 1992), which seeks to explore
how objects become part of a person’s identity and social life.
Additionally, the Domestication Approach focuses on
technologies in everyday life and their symbolic role.

Qualitative Inquiry
Given the exploratory nature of this work, I lean towards
qualitative research practices to understand the user
experience of material representations. Oliveto (2008) defines
qualitative research as the use of unstructured exploratory

A qualitative study starts with a research question or problem
and involves collection of rich subjective data through
different methods such as participant observations, interviews,
and informal discussions. Such research generally allows the
themes to emerge from the data without following any
hypothesis or theory to confirm. The essence of a qualitative
research lies in collecting thick descriptive details from
participants and extending the application of the generated
findings across different contexts through design implications
(Creswell et al. 2003). Yardley differentiates qualitative
research with quantitative research by stating: “Quantitative
studies […] ensure the ‘horizontal generalisation’ of their
findings across research settings […] qualitative researchers
aspire instead to [… ] ’vertical generalisation’, i.e., an endeavour
to link the particular to the abstract and to the work of others”.
(2000, p.220). Below I mention the qualitative methods that I
have utilised in my research.

techniques to understand a problem in greater depth. Within

Qualitative interviews

HCI, qualitative inquiry plays an important role in conducting

I opted for semi-structured interviews (Neuman 2006) to

different phases of research: starting from the data gathering
where researchers interact with the potential users to
understand their needs, to developing research prototype
where researchers conduct informal discussions or focussed
group workshops with experts to get feedback on prototype, to
evaluating the developed prototype in practise where
researchers study how the developed prototype had made a
difference in the given context (Patton 2002). Qualitative
inquiry is based on understanding the lived experiences of
users with special attention given to the context where the
events occur.

collect participants’ responses to each of the systems during
field deployments. Interviews are commonly used to
understand the mediated interactions of a user with the given
system (ibid; Blandford et al. 2016). Interviews involve
conversations and face-to-face discussions between at least
two people. Interviews provide greater insights on the user’s
experience with a system, something that cannot be easily
measured through quantitative data. During interviews, users
narrate different stories around their bad and good
experiences with the system, which help researchers to reflect
on different aspects of the system. Such stories are a great

In qualitative inquiry, the researcher is the main instrument

medium to reveal human artefact relationship, as people

who relies on his or her skills to uncover different meanings of

disclose several other life situations and emotional meanings

a given context. As such, qualitative inquiry is explained

that are invoked by the given system. As such, interviews helps

through the phenomenon of “constructivism” and “interpretivis”

in uncovering personal opinions about comfort, issues and

where the researchers first construct the meaning of different

satisfaction of the user with the given system.

events from the perspective of users, and then interpret it

Interviews can be less or more structured (Blandford et al.

personally through the gained evidences. Blandford et al.
(2016) reports that there is no single right way to conduct a
study, nor is there a prescribed value of an ideal number of
participants. How a researcher chooses a particular method
depends on the researcher’s personal positions concerning
ways of creating new knowledge (Zhao et al 2008). While
Woolrych et al. (2011) mention that “the art of conducting an
effective study is in pulling together appropriate ingredients to

2016). A structured interview is like a questionnaire where
researcher strictly follows a predetermined set of questions.
On the other hand, a completely unstructured interview, also
called as open-ended interview, is more like a conversation on
a specific topic where both participant and researcher ask
questions and learn new things about the related avenues
through the discussion. Finally, the middle ground of both is
the semi-structured interviews where the researcher follows a

Page 35 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

set of questions to guide the interview, while also following up

physical activity. I audio recorded all the interviews for later

with participant on the interesting topics that emerge during

analysis. Figure 13 shows a snapshot of the interview session.

the conversation. Semi-structured and open-ended interviews
have been effectively used in the field of design to explore
questions related to people’s thoughts, beliefs, attitudes and
emotional feelings about a product in use. Charmaz (2006)
further highlighted the important aspects of an “intensive
interview” and suggested that an interviewer should encourage
the participant to talk more by asking open questions, while
the researcher’s main responsibility should be to steer the
discussion towards the research aims by being less attentive to

Tools for self-documentation
Inspired by the cultural probe methodology (Gaver et al. 2004),
I asked participants to record their own experiences in a
provided diary to elicit deeper provocative and evocative
incidents that they may not recall during the interview process.
This task however was not compulsory. Participants were also
free to use other methods of recording, such as and not limited
to taking videos, photos and audio recording. To my surprise, in

avenues that are out of scope.

the TastyBeats study, a couple of participants voluntarily audio-

During the field deployments, I kept the nature of the

file with me via email. In all the studies, majority of the

interviews semi-structured in order to leave sufficient room for
topics to emerge, and to support a deeper elucidation of
participants’ responses and thinking processes. During each
interview, I carried a list of questions (topic guide) related to
my research aims that helped me to remain on track, while
leaving sufficient flexibility in the discourse. As Blandford et al.
(2016) highlighted that people’s ability to self-report facts is
limited, I therefore, also utilised visual materials to further

recorded their experience on daily basis, and shared the audio
participants voluntarily took photographs of the system or the
constructed artefacts, created video recordings of the system
printing artefacts, and took photographs of their visitors
engaging with the system. I found it extremely heartening to
see such commitment and interest from the participants. The
data collected via these methods was used to supplement the
interviews (refer Figure 14).

support rich expressions and articulation of experience. For

Focus group

instance, I discussed photographs (voluntarily) shared by the

Focus group is a kin to interviews that utilises the potential of

participants on social networks, and snapshots of the material

multiple people to generate ideas or data related to a topic

representations that participants received during the study

(Kitzinger 1995). Unlike interviews, focus group is an

period. Additionally, I also welcomed opportunities to discuss

appropriate form of data collection method when the

any other illustrations and recordings that participants

researcher is not looking for individual biographies and

voluntarily captured during the course of study, e.g., video

preferences related to a given product. Rather the researcher is

recording of the system preparing the material

aiming to learn from the knowledge and experiences of

representations. Supporting interviews with multiple medium

several people to form a collective understanding of to a topic.

resources helped me to investigate how people reacted and

In situations, when the researcher has a series of open-ended

integrated the developed prototypes into everyday practise. It

questions related to a topic and the researcher wants to

also allowed me to explore how the interactions with systems

evaluate them in a quick but critical manner, focus group

affected participant’s behaviour and their relationship with

comes to rescue.

Figure 13: A screenshot of one
participants talking about his
experience with the
SweatAtoms system.

Page 36 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Composition of focus group

with unbiased responses. For

studies can vary from only a few

instance, it might be difficult for a

people to a huge group of fifty

staff member or a student to give

people, with ideal size

true comments about the

recommended as 4-8

administration in the presence of

participants. The researcher’s

their manager or teacher. To keep

role during the focus group is to

the discussion ongoing, researchers

facilitate the group discussion

often take notes and make flow

such that everyone gets an

charts on boards so that the

opportunity to bring their points,

participants also get informed on

while steering the conversation

the key themes that emerged. Group

such that the discussion does

discussions are generally video or

not move away from the main

audio recorded for later analysis.

topic.
Focus group taps into the dynamics of group
communication where instead of asking
every individual to respond in turn, the

Figure 14: Few participants
articulated their experiences in
the provided diaries, whereas a
couple of participants provided
me voice memos and emails.

discussion emerges with people voluntarily

I have utilised focus groups across different
phases of my research. These discussions were
conducted with HCI experts, industrial designers
and interaction designers working in the related
domain. For instance, I conducted focus group

participating, sharing their experiences, commenting on each

with HCI experts to get feedback on different parameters of

other’s viewpoints, and asking questions (Watts and Ebutt

case studies such as duration of study, tasks for participants,

1987). Focus group allows participants to express their

and number of artefacts to offer. Figure 15 shows a snapshot

concerns, generate questions, develop answers around them

of the ideation sheet that I utilised to evaluate the study

and then converge to key points to answer the given question.

design of SweatAtoms.

It is due to the social dynamics that focus group allows people
to explore and clarify their views that they can not do in oneto-one interview. As such, focus group not only allows the
researcher to know what people think but also provides
knowledge of how and why they think that way.
Group discussions are typically relaxed and
participants are allowed to bring forms of
communication from everyday routine, e.g., teasing
and arguing. The idea behind the informal
environment is to make people comfortable with
each other, so that they can participate in the
discussion to their full potential. Given the informal
nature, focus groups may become an appropriate
venue to discuss even the embarrassing and negative
concerns related to the topic.
Focus group methods utilise participants as an active
part of the research process. To this end, the
composition of a focus group highly impacts the
dynamics and topics that emerge for discussion, and
finally the quality of outcome (Hughes and Dumont
1993). Therefore, participants of focus group should
be carefully selected. To this end, making the group
homogenous with participants from different
expertise, and different range of professions, helps in
bringing in different perspectives within a group
setting. However, the hierarchy of position and power
should be considered to allow maximised exploration

Figure 15: I brought printed sheets of the
ideas and related concepts at the focus
group discussions to refine and finalise
ideas and study design.

Page 37 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Every participant of the focus group filled their responses on

phase, the researcher gathers different codes to form

the sheet, and later everyone discussed their priorities to

candidate themes, and draws a visual mind map to make

confirm the best study design. Similarly, I conducted focus

meaning across different codes. The fourth phase is dedicated

group with interaction designers while designing different

to review the generated themes to refine them. Here,

models of material representations where I run through the

depending upon the data available for each theme, some

designers with different models and their significance with

themes need to be broken down into sub-themes, some will be

physical activity. The designers provided insights on how to

combined with other themes, while some may need to be

improve the models. Finally, I have conducted focus groups to

removed. By this phase, the mind map begins to reflect a story

evaluate the utility of the proposed framework, Shelfie. During

of the data. In the fifth phase, the researcher writes a detailed

these sessions, I asked participants to design material

narration related to each theme. The researcher again reviews

representations for any sports data of their interest through

that each story is unique and is related to the research aim. If

the design cards of the framework. Later in the session,

not, the researcher refines the theme again. Lastly, in the sixth

everyone discussed their design and the reason behind their

phase, the researcher writes narration of all the themes

options. The discussion helped me to understand the

together to provide a logical, coherent, and interesting account

importance of different cards, and the ease to understand

of the story.

them.

In this thesis, I have utilised thematic analysis to analyse the

Thematic Analysis

collected data from field deployments (transcripts of

Qualitative data analysis is the process of transforming the

interviews, and participants diaries), and focus groups (notes). I

collected data into meaningful interpretations related to
system, context, and interactions under investigation (Braun
and Clarke 2006). Data analysis is the most challenging phase
of qualitative research as the quality of the conducted research
depends on the rigour of analysis. The researcher has a huge
data to work on, for example, hundreds of pages of interview
transcripts, diary notes, and detailed field notes from focus
groups. A good quality of analysis includes different iterations
of the data to discover patterns, linking them together to form
coherent themes, and finally linking different themes together
to form a coherent story. Making sense of the complex data, is
therefore, considered as a creative task, as the patterns and

manually performed the coding across the dataset and utilised
post-its and board to label the data. Figure 16 shows a
snapshot of the thematic analysis performed to formulate
themes for the initial version of Shelfie framework. As such, the
iterative and reflexive process of reading through the data and
interpreting it, helped me in gaining deeper insights from the
collected data. Reading and re-reading the data, have also
helped me to refine my research question and also guided me
towards my next study. For instance, through the interview
quotes, I gained insights on the affordance of different
materials, and the relationship of users with materials - which
in turn, helped me to think about different potential material

themes do not directly emerge from data.

that could be used in the subsequent studies.

Rather it requires cognitive skills to interpret the data and

Justification on study choices

reflect upon it such that the reported data not only present the

I next describe the rationale behind some of my study design

commonalities across the participants’ but also the variations

decisions.

in a concise and non-repetitive manner.
Thematic analysis is a method for identifying, analysing, and
reporting patterns (themes) within the collected data (Braun
and Clarke 2006). A theme is a label that captures something
important about the data in relation to the research question.
The authors identified six phases of conducting thematic
analysis (ibid, p.87). In the first phase, researcher familiarises
himself with the data by simply reading and re-reading the
data, and taking notes on the way with different ideas that
emerge. In the second phase, researcher generates initial codes
throughout the dataset, and
collects data related to each code
together. The code refers to a
label that describes an interesting
feature of the data. In the third

Figure 16: A screenshot of
collected data used during
thematic analysis.

Page 38 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Rationale for choosing everyday physical activity

60-80 beats per minute (BPM). To this end, a given exercise

Previous research on self-monitoring by Pantzar and

(e.g. walking up a flight of stairs) will result in different

Ruckenstein (2014) suggests that people take an interest in
personal informatics tools and tracking of their physical
activity data as long as it supports and promotes their health
related goals. However, existing personal informatics tools
have given less emphasis to everyday physical activity and are
more geared towards specific physical activity such as
dedicated exercise sessions and team sports events. Recent
research by Duvivier et al. (2013) suggests that short intense
exercise is not necessarily good enough to result in health
benefits; rather an individual needs to be active throughout

patterns of elevated heart rate for different people. Heart rate
might also increase in response to stress, anxiety and shock. In
certain cases, heart rate patterns could also reveal an
underlying illness. However, to obtain this level of detailed
analysis would require more explicit interventions in one’s life
and greater logging commitments from participants.
Considering these difficulties and following the focus of this
work, I chose to explore the playful side of self-monitoring,
without going deep into the reasons behind heart rate
elevation. This was justified as none of the study participants

the whole day.

were deemed unhealthy, neither I recruited serious athletes

Everyday physical activities such as walking to the office,

participants of the studies were moderately healthy users who

standing, shopping, and cleaning involve light to moderate
levels of physical activity and can contribute to health benefits
by burning body fats (Fan et al. 2013). Levine (2002) refers to
these activities as non-exercise activity thermogenesis (or
NEAT), which is an easy way of turning mundane activities into
calorie burning opportunities. Inspired by these studies, I have
chosen to support physical activity as it is a popular area of
research, and people seem to enjoy using new technology in

and runners who exercise extensively every week. The
exercise 2-3 times in a week. To this end, the pattern of their
heart rate was fairly consistent, except for a couple of
participants who observed irregularities in their heart rate as a
result of medication and underlying illness. However, I
encourage designers of the future systems to pay attention to
heart rate values and think carefully while mapping them to
material artefacts.

their physical activity pursuits.

Rationale for choosing heart rate data
I chose heart rate data to represent physical activity because

1

of its popular use to analyse physical activity performance and
progress towards a set health goal (Connelly et al. 2006). I

2

also chose to record an entire day’s data, and not just the time
spent performing physical activity, so that I can present an
overall picture of one’s active lifestyle. Using heart rate data
also allowed me to create novel and very personal material
representations of one’s physical activity owing to the fact that

3

4

two individuals with equal physical capacity can have different
maximum heart rate and threshold values, creating very

5

different data points for different people. I discussed the finer
details of heart rate data with physical activity trainers and
looked into how six heart rate zones can be utilised to convey

PERCENTAGE OF MAXIMUM
HEART RATE

ZONE NAME

6

Resting zone

Less than 50% of the
maximum heart rate

Recovery zone

Between 50% to 60% of the
maximum heart rate

Aerobic zone

Between 60% to 70% of the
maximum heart rate

Anaerobic zone

Between 70% to 80% of the
maximum heart rate

Speed zone

Between 80% to 90% of the
maximum heart rate

Alarming zone

Over 90% of the maximum
heart rate

varied information related to physical activity. I briefly discuss
the key terminologies such as maximum heart rate, resting

Table 1: Summary of the six heart rate zones

heart rate and the heart rate zones in Table 1.
The discussions gave insights into how exercise affects the

Rationale for choosing home environment

functioning of the heart. When a novice individual begins to

The selection of “home environment” for the studies is fuelled

exercise, heart rate increases in proportion to the level of

by the engagement opportunities with material artefacts

exertion. However, an individual’s cardiovascular fitness

inhibited by the environment. As pointed out by Blythe et al.

improves over time with regular aerobic exercise. As a result, a

(2012), home is a major site not only for consumption of media

fitter individual would not encounter such rapid changes in

but also for possible production.

heart rate. Rather, the heart rate would stay in a desired heart

This private space leverages new challenges as well as

rate zone for longer. Secondly, fitter people also tend to have
lower resting heart rates. The average resting heart rate is

opportunities for product development. Getting a deeper

Page 39 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

understanding of how a proposed interaction or product will fit

Cards also help in speeding up the refinement and iteration of

into the home ambiance is crucial and can open up

ideas by keeping the discussion centred on a given design task

possibilities for future designs. For example, the home can

- making the ideation phase productive (Halskov and

facilitate a space for an autotopography (Gonzalez 1995) of

Dalsgaard 2006; Hornecker 2010). To this end, cards offer a fun

material artefacts, and it is also a safer and creative

tactile experience of ideating and discussing ideas

environment for cooking and eating related tasks. In this safe

collaboratively.

and personal space, study participants can be more
imaginative while articulating the uses of material artefacts
that embody their physical activity.

From design to knowledge generation
Research through Design projects are increasingly being
practiced within the field of HCI. Existing works point out
various ways of disseminating knowledge in such design led
research. This includes creating design dimensions (Löwgren
2013), design guidelines (Lidwell et al. 2003), annotated
portfolios (Gaver and Bowers 2012), strong concepts (Höök
and Löwgren 2012) and design frameworks (Löwgren 2013).
Löwgren (2013, p.32-33) refers to them as forms of
intermediate-level knowledge which occupy a crucial territory
between the general theory and designed artefacts. However,
translating these intermediate forms of knowledge in practice
is always the biggest challenge. In this regard, Hornecker
(2010) raise concerns over the lengthy, dense and jargon-laden
nature of design frameworks. Similarly, Rogers (2004) invites
more “lightweight and accessible” ways of transferring
knowledge from design theory to practice. In response, I lean
towards using Design cards to make the generated knowledge
accessible to design researchers.

Numerous works in the past have looked into card based
design tools to support brainstorming and ideation process
during the early stages of design research (Bekker and Antle
2011; Deng et al. 2014; Mueller et al. 2014; Hornecker 2010;
Lucero and Arrasvuori 2010; Chung and Liang 2016). For
example, Mueller et al (2014) created exertion cards that allow
the creation of exertion games, while Lucero and Arrasvuori
(2010) created PLEX cards for creating pleasurable designs
and playful game experiences. Hornecker (2010) created
ideation cards for creating tangible interactions. Deng et al.
(2014) created Tango Cards to enable the creation of tangible
learning games. Halskov and Dalsgaard (2006) created two
sets of inspiration cards — Domain cards and application cards
— to support ideation of new concepts for design. IDEO (2002)
created a deck of 51 cards, where each card illustrates a usercentered design process. Lockton’s 'design with intent' toolkit
(Lockton et al. 2008) is another deck of cards to influence
behavioural change. Finally, Wolfel and Merritt (2013) provide
a comprehensive survey of design cards used in academia and
practice, whereas Deckaholic6 is a great online library that
curates a list of design cards used in practice. Each of these
card-based design frameworks allow different perspectives to
emerge to support designing for a specific context. I took these

Design cards

works as an inspiration to ground my understanding within the

A deck of design cards is a useful tool for discovering ideas,

interaction design and to explore an unknown design space of

capturing a diverse set of possibilities for designing in a
certain context. Rather than offering strict guidelines or
strategies, the deck of design cards acts as a catalyst to

creating material representations. The “form-driven interaction
design” framework by Jung and Stolterman (2012) was
particularly, influential in grounding my understanding of

stimulate and support divergent imaginations of the designers

material culture and framing the key concepts.

during the ideation process. Interestingly, design cards do not

Summary

follow any order - giving more flexibility and freedom to
designers to come up with different sequences of design
themes as per their preferences. Design cards provide
designers with a common vocabulary about a certain context
during the ideation phase. The tangibility of design cards acts
as a “physical anchor” and helps in generating concrete design
knowledge (Bekker and Antle 2011; Deng et al. 2014).

This chapter presented different methods that are utilised to
address the research aim of this thesis. Embracing Research
through Design approach, I have developed three systems that
are discussed in the next three chapters. Each system was
deployed at participant’s home from where I collected rich
qualitative data on their experience with the deployed system.
I also utilised qualitative methods to design the framework
Shelfie that is discussed in Chapter 7.

6

http://deckoholic.com

Page 40 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#4
SweatAtoms

Page 41 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CASE STUDY 1

SweatAtoms

Material used
Biodegradable Plastic (PLA)
Process followed
3D Printing
Produced outcomes
Five artefacts: Graph, Dice,
Flower, Frog and Ring

Key Publication
Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian Mueller.
Understanding Physical Activity through 3D Printed
Material Artefacts. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’14), ACM Press (2014).

Ethics Approval number:
CHEAN A-2000858-03/13
Public Exhibitions

Other Publications:

2013 — ACM CHI Interactivity 2013, Paris
France.

IE 2013; CHI Work in Progess 2013; CHI Student
Research Competition 2013

2016 — Design & Play, RMIT Design Hub,
Melbourne, Australia

This chapter describes the first case study that investigates 3D printed material representations of
physical activity data through a system called SweatAtoms.
Introduction to this chapter

laser cutters. According to Gershenfeld (2007), 3D printers and

My first case study looks into 3D printed material

scanners will soon be found in every home and people will

representations of physical activity data. I have designed and

regularly use them to make, copy, and share their custom made

studied SweatAtoms, a novel system that constructs 3D printed

designs and material artefacts. Their rapid growth has

material artefacts from heart rate data of physical activity. This

captured the attention of design and HCI and they are now

chapter describes the system, along with the insights gained

investigating possible ways of using it to support their design

from field deployments of the SweatAtoms system. I conclude

and research processes (Mellis et al. 2013; Buechley and

the chapter by discussing the key concepts that emerged from

Perner-Wilson 2013). According to Mellis et al. (2013) material

the study and how these concepts sketch out portions of the

artefacts can be useful as design tools and interfaces for

Shelfie framework.

online collaboration, for hands-on learning and as

Recent advancements in digital fabrication (Anderson 2010)
have made the task of fabricating personalised material
artefacts easier, accessible and affordable with 3D printers and

personalised items. Additionally, a DIY movement led to a
growing interest of people in digital fabrication (Kuznetsov
and Paulos 2010).

Page 42 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

The growing affordability of digital fabrication (Mota 2011)

forming an aesthetic and informative expression of physical

has prompted me to consider fabricating personalised material

activity data in material form (refer Figure 17).

artefacts that can provide an alternate testimony to the
invested efforts in performing physical activity. I was also
inspired by the synergy between the way we exercise and the
way a model is 3D printed. I believe the lost energy during the
physical activity could be utilised in the 3D printing process to
influence and shape the design of a particular artefact.
I also drew inspiration from previous research on archiving
and souvenirs, which suggests that the material artefacts can
be more cherishable and meaningful than virtual objects
because of their higher visibility in the surrounding and low
replication value (Golsteijn et al. 2012; Kirk et al. 2011). For
example, when a person shares (gives) any digital object with
someone, she also retains a copy, which she could later use for
herself or even for others. Material artefacts on the other hand
feels more unique as the original sender does not retain any
copy of those objects once she has gifted them to someone.
However, one could argue that with the rise of personal

Graph: The first artefact is Graph; it mimics a virtual graph.
Graph takes the average of the recorded heartbeats per minute
and represents them as points on an XY space. The plotted
points are then extruded along the Z-axis to achieve the
suitable thickness (4mm) for 3D printing.
Flower: The second artefact is Flower. This artefact unlike
Graph, captures only the significant (substantial) changes in
the heart rate and represents them in a floral pattern. The
number of petals in a flower corresponds to observed
fluctuations in the heart rate, in the range of +-20 beats per
minute (bpm). The length of the petal describes the heart rate
value at a particular instance when a rise or fall in heart rate
occurred whereas the width of the petal signifies the duration
of the fluctuation. For example, an increase in heart rate by 20
bpm for 1 minute will make the corresponding petal longer by
4mm and wider by 2mm.

fabrication and easy to use 3D printers, the uniqueness

Frog: The third artefact is Frog, which serves as a playful

property of the material artefacts can be lost as one can now

reward for doing physical activity. The size of the Frog

easily make many replicas of the same object. I address this

corresponds to the amount of physical activity done in a day.

concern by fabricating material artefacts based on the physical

As such, with an increase in physical activity, Frog becomes

activity data of the users during physical activity. I draw on the

bigger. The amount of physical activity is calculated based on

fact that the bodily response to physical activities is different

the number of times a user’s heart rate was above the recovery

for every individual and varies with each physical activity.

zone (above 60% of the maximum heart rate) successively for

Therefore, when utilised in the design process of material

at least 10 minutes, in accordance with ACSM guidelines

artefacts, chances are high that resultant material artefacts

(American College of Sports Medicine 2013).

will bear a unique pattern. Therefore, I argue that these

Dice: The fourth artefact is Dice. The six faces of the Dice

material artefacts will hold more meaning due to its
distinctive quality and design for every individual and
activities. Motivated by this, I created and studied SweatAtoms,
which I explain next.

SweatAtoms
SweatAtoms is a 3D modelling and printing system that
transforms physical activity data into five different 3D printed
material forms. I have utilised the constructive solid geometry
techniques (Requicha and Voelcker 1977) to generate 3D
designs. These models are then printed using a 3D printer,

represent the six heart rate zones. Each face of the Dice has a
central hole, where the diameter depicts the amount of time
spent in that particular heart rate zone. For example, if a user
has been sedentary for most of the time, then the central hole
of the face that represents the ‘Resting’ zone will be widened,
whereas if the user has been highly active with a heart rate
value constantly above 80% of the maximum heart rate, then
the central bubbles of the
faces corresponding to the
“Anaerobic” and “Speed” zone
will be widened in diameter.

Figure 17: Five 3D printed
representation of physical
activity: a) Graph b) Frog c)
Flower d) Dice and e) Ring.

Page 43 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Ring: The final artefact is Ring, which can be worn on a finger

I discussed the finer details of heart rate data with two

and offers a summary of how active a user has been during the

physical activity coaches to uncover interesting patterns and

day. The circles around the Ring denotes the number of hours

insights on physical activity routine. They suggested the use of

of recording heart rate data, whereas the diameter of each

heart rate zones to convey different aspects of physical activity.

circle corresponds to the amount of physical activity done in

For example, they suggested that the resting heart rate is a

that particular hour. Again, the amount of physical activity is

good indicator of a user’s physical in-activity, hence,

measured in terms of duration where the heart rate was

highlighting it in the design of a material artefact could make

successively above the recovery zone for at least 10 minutes.

users aware of their sedentary lifestyle. For example, I chose

Table 2 gives a summary of the maximum dimensions and the
average time required to print each of the five artefacts.
MAX. DIMENSION
IN MILIMETERS

REPRESENTATION

AVG. PRINT TIME
IN MINUTES

1

Graph

120 ✕ 80 ✕ 4

20 minutes

2

Flower

40 ✕ 40 ✕ 4

25 minutes

3

Frog

20 ✕ 20 ✕ 20

30 minutes

4

Dice

16 ✕ 16 ✕ 16

35 minutes

5

Ring

20 ✕ 20 ✕ 4

10 minutes

the Dice artefact to denote the time that users spend in each
of the six heart rate zones each day (explained further below).

Choosing the five designs
I ran a one-hour brainstorming session with five interaction
designers to help me in selecting the final designs for my
chosen material artefacts. I used 25 artefacts in this session in
total in order to aid the discussion. Some of the artefacts were
3D printed and some of them were off the shelf products as
shown in Figure 18. Additionally I also employed the following
five design strategies, inspired by Consolvo et al. (2009) to
finalise the designs:
Abstract and reflective: The material representation should

Table 2: Summary of the selected five representations in terms
of maximum dimensions and average print time

reflect crucial aspects of physical activity but in an
aesthetically pleasing way. Supporting this, I chose Frog, Flower,
Dice and Ring that the designers believed metaphorically
represented key information about user’s physical activity.

Design process

Additionally, the displayed data was abstract in nature, and

The design process involved an investigation into the design

would require help from the wearer to unlock its meaning to

space surrounding material representation, 3D printing and

others.

physical activity. To help me explore each of these design

Public: Users should be able to wear the artefact or keep them

spaces, I held regular meetings with design experts in each of

on display in their home. To achieve this, all artefacts from the

the above-mentioned areas. For example, I had lengthy

SweatAtoms system had some inbuilt utility. For example,

discussions with two junior level interaction designers (1 male

Flower, Graph and Ring can be worn as jewellery, whereas Frog

and 1 female) and three senior contemporary artists (1 male

and Dice can be displayed as in home decorations.

and 2 female) on possible representation choices. I also talked
to an expert (1 male) in the field of 3D printing, who had been
prevalent in the field for at least two years, to identify the
current limitations and possibilities of state-of-the-art 3D
printers. Finally I also spoke to three designers of exertion
games (3 male, 1 senior and 2 junior) as well as two physical
activity trainers (2 male) to identify the aspects of physical
activity that could be highlighted in a material form.

Choosing the input: heart rate data of physical
activity
I chose heart rate data to represent physical activity as
heart rate data is commonly used
to analyse physical activity
performance and progress
towards a set health goal (Benson
and Connolly 2011).

Figure 18: 3D printed
and off the shelves
artefacts were used
during the ideation
process.

Unique: Each artefact should appear unique and differentiable
from the rest of the artefacts. To support this strategy all
chosen designs were distinct and personalised for each
individual due to their unique heart rate pattern.

Page 44 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Positive: The material artefact should be a positive

2014; Brown et al. 2011). On the first day of the study, we

reinforcement for doing physical activity. To support this

asked the participants about their level of physical activity in a

strategy I set a default minimum size for each artefact and

typical week and the kind of physical activities they do on

users received all five artefacts from the SweatAtoms system -

regular basis. Figure 19 describes participants’ demographics

irrespective of physical activity undertaken by them during the

along with their self-stated level of physical activity per week.

day.

Low physical activity corresponds to 1-2 days of physical

Choosing the digital fabrication process
My motivation behind using a 3D printer to create these
artefacts stems from the synergy I see between exercise and
3D printing. Exercise involves the expenditure of

activity per week while medium activity corresponds to 3-4
days of physical activity per week. A high level of physical
activity is when participants engage in physical activity for
more than 4 days per week.

energy without any material gain. 3D printing,
however, follows an additive manufacturing process
whereby a material artefact is created by additively
depositing plastic layer by layer on top of a print bed.
Therefore, the idea of combining the two came to my
mind.
I looked into current 3D printer technology in order
to understand their limitations and capabilities to
print different shapes. For example, I realised that
the current printers are not capable of printing
complex shapes, which limits possible representation
choices. Additionally, I also considered the printing
time, which increases with the complexity and
density of a selected shape. I also took into
consideration the environmental sustainability by
using biodegradable plastic filament (PLA) to create

Figure 19: Demographic details of the study
participant along with their level of physical activity.
Mod. active means moderately active

these artefacts.

SweatAtoms in action (field study)
I conducted an “in the wild” study (Rogers 2011; Brown et al.
2011) to understand the impact of material artefacts on the
behaviour and experience of individuals engaged in everyday
physical activity. Given the exploratory nature of this design
work, I leaned towards the idea of “in the wild” studies that
aim to encourage reflective thinking about a system and where
the focus is on gathering a rich set of opinions.

Setup
Each participant received a heart rate monitor (Polar H7), an
iPod Touch (5th generation) with the installed Polar Beat
application and a Cube 3D printer 7 with 2-3 PLA plastic
filament tubes as printing material. The heart rate monitor was
paired up with the iPod using the Bluetooth low energy
protocol. Following the cultural probing practice, I also

Recruitment

provided diaries and asked participants to use them to reflect

I deployed the SweatAtoms system across 6 households in

upon their experience with the system. Participants were not

Melbourne, Australia for a period of two weeks and

compensated for participating in the study.

participants were recruited using the snowball method
(Biernacki and Waldorf 1981). In most cases for each
household one person participated in the study, however, in
one instance two participants – Frank and Kate (names
changed to preserve anonymity) – participated together. There
were 4 male and 3 female participants in total, aged 26 to 52
years (average 34 years). The sample size was in line with
previous studies (Lee et al. 2015; Gaver et al. 2013; Odom et al.
7

http://www.3dsystems.com/shop/cube

Procedure
On the first day of the study, I installed the SweatAtoms system
in each different household. I introduced the participants to
the system, study procedure and explained the meaning of
each artefact. As my intention was to make the printer a part
of the home I placed the printer in the home according to the
participants’ wishes, noting the location.

Page 45 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

I also went through the process of printing one artefact to

Data source

make participants familiar with the printing process. I then

To gain insights into the underlying motives and experiences

interviewed participants about their daily routines in terms of
physical activity. I also provided every participant with an A4
poster detailing the study steps to be followed as shown in
Figure 20. Participants were requested to perform the
following tasks on each day of the study:

Tasks in the morning

of the participants I asked the participants to maintain a daily
diary. I visited each household twice (on the first and last day
of the study) and spent around 4-5 hours with each
participant. Based on the participants’ needs (such as difficulty
in running the 3D printer), I visited two houses more
frequently.

I asked the participants to wear the heart rate monitor and
start recording their heart rate data using the Polar Beat
application, installed on the iPod. Participants then continued
their daily routine as usual whilst the
monitor was recording. It was not
explicitly required for participants
to be overtly physically active
during the day, rather the monitor
would record their regular activity.
and thus I asked the participants to
follow their normal routine.

Tasks in the evening
I asked the participants to stop the
Polar Beat application and to take
off the heart rate monitor in the
evening (usually around 5-7 pm).
Once the heart rate monitor was
stopped the recorded data was
sent automatically to the Polar
website. I then downloaded and
parsed the data to generate five
material representations in the
Stereo- Lithography (STL) format.
Due to the taxing nature of the
study, I did the conversions for the
participants. I then manually
converted the STL files into the
required print file formats (.cube)
and emailed the converted files
back to the participants.
To print the material
representations, participants were
required to copy these files onto a
USB stick and print them one by
one by attaching the USB stick to
the 3D printer. The printing time
varied for every object based on
the participants’ level of physical
activity (and thus the object size)
every day, but typically took around
90-120 minutes to print all five objects.

Figure 20: Detailed instruction sheet was printed as
A4 sized poster and given to each participants.

Page 46 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Additionally, I was in contact with each participant through

change the filament, I had to recalibrate the print offset and

emails and phone calls if they needed help. At the end of the

replace the print filament.

study, I conducted semi-structured interviews with each
participant that lasted around 40 minutes. In the
conversations, I focused on how they used the SweatAtoms

Relating to physical activity
The second set of findings discusses participant’s reactions to

system and gathered their thoughts and experiences with it. I

material artefacts in relation to their physical activity.

also took notes and recorded audio to aid the analysis.

SweatAtoms raised awareness about physical activity

Findings

Most participants became more conscious about their physical

The deployment of material artefacts representing physical
activity not only led to identifying new insights and
opportunities, but also raised some interesting questions.
Below, I describe my key findings from the deployment of the
system across five key sections.

activity routines and started to take their heart rate data more
seriously with time. Alan said: “I used to see my heart rate data
on my mobile, but this is different, now I can not only touch and
feel my data, but I can also show it to the world, I care more about
my heart rate now.” Alicia confirmed: “My trainer was so happy to
see my progress, thanks for letting me participate.” This supports

Intervention

findings from previous research where participants gained

The size of the 3D printer was key to finding an appropriate

awareness about themselves from a visualisation method (Li

place within the household. Most participants usually placed

et al. 2010; Fan et al. 2012).

the 3D printer in their living room space, close to a window or
vent to reduce the potential print smell as seen in Figure 21.
Figure 21: Participants
tried to make the 3D
printer fit into their
home ambience by
placing it on a desk or
next to the window.
Smell was another
reason why placement
was near a open
ventilation (window).

Alan (name changed), however, kept the printer along with his

Interpreting artefacts was difficult at first but improved

other tech gadgets in a separate room. Kate was particularly

with time

happy with the size of the printer as it fitted nicely into an
empty window space. Interestingly, Kelly considered the printer
as a precious part of her household and kept the printer on a
table near to an open window. In order to conceal the printer’s
appearance from the outside world, Kelly also surrounded the
printer with cardboard to prevent theft. The printer worked
smoothly for the entire study duration in all households except
one. At Alan’s house, the printer was not aligned properly so I
had to realign it by changing the offset (where it prints) and

Besides understanding their physical activity levels,
participants also tried to understand their daily routines from
the printed material artefacts. Frank said: “It was great to know
about the self and my activities throughout the day from the
printed artefact (Graph): when I went to university, when I came
back (by looking at large peaks in the graph) when I sat idle (by
looking at lower peaks)”.

Page 47 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

However, Frank and Alicia initially had difficulties in

you cannot, it is more persistent”. Participants also mentioned

interpreting the Flower. Alicia thought the Flower was like a

that they care more about these artefacts because they contain

clock that shows her physical activity of the entire day.

their personal data and are printed on them at home. Referring

Referring to a large petal in the Flower she said, “I can see that

to the Flower and Graph artefacts, Kate mentioned, “This is me

my heart was really pumped around 2 pm when I had to rush

and my data, you cannot get this form in the market.”

twice to the office for urgent work.” After discovering that the
Flower does not work like a clock, she felt slightly disappointed
and suggested if I could update the Flower design. Kelly and
Chad expressed the need of designing artefacts that are easier
to interpret, similar to the Frog artefact.

Accommodating the SweatAtoms system
Frank bought a box to keep all his SweatAtoms together (Figure
23) while Kelly utilised the envelopes of promotional
campaigns to keep objects sorted according to each day.

Increased motivation and interest in physical activity

Figure 23: Frank bought a box to keep all his
SweatAtoms together.

Although this work did not target an immediate behavioural
change among the participants, there was anecdotal evidence
of increased physical activity amongst all participants. For
example, Alicia and her fitness coach both were happy to see
increased physical activity. She wrote to me in an email,
presented in Figure 22: “I am out on my bike and am aware of
my heart. In the past, if I exercised on Saturday I would have said
that I deserve to rest on Sunday :)” Dave resumed his weight
training routine after a long period to see the routine reflected
in the artefacts. He mentioned: “It’s been ages since I did weight
training but now this study prompted me to start weight training
again”. I find these examples illustrative of people’s rekindled
interest in physical activity. Kelly emphasised that “It’s the Frog,
that makes me jog more”, while Frank and Kate said that they
did more physical activity to get a bigger Frog artefact at the
end of the day.

Personalisation and tangibility was important
During the follow-up interviews, I asked the participants what
difference a material artefact made over the virtual
counterpart. Most participants answered positively that the
physical form and the support for sensory capabilities like
touch and feel make the material artefacts more special than
the virtual ones.
Kate added that “[on a mobile phone] You look at your heart rate
and then forget about it, here [addressing the material artefact]

I found it noteworthy that a participant went out of their way
and bought a box, as I had not previously seen such
commitment in some of my prior work with participants. Other
participants gave some of the artefacts away to their loved
ones or arranged them as decorative pieces in different corners
of their household.
Figure 22: SweatAtoms encouraged
participants to do more physical activity.

Page 48 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

For example, Frogs were placed on top of the home computer’s

printing process, however, their interest in watching the print

desktop screen (Figure 24), while Flower and Dice usually

process faded over time. Frank mentioned, “In the beginning, it

occupied a table space in the living room. It was encouraging

was exciting to see how objects are being printed in different

to see that participants took an interest in correlating and

sizes, small, big, it felt like a recap of my physical activity,

arranging the objects together (Figure 25). All participants

sometimes really intense and sometimes not so much... but later

were happy with the selected design choices for representing

on it became too time consuming.” He further added that he

their physical activity.

would prefer to have objects delivered to him
Figure 24: ‘Frog’ was the favourite artefact and it
usually occupied a space on top of the desktop.

in a mailbox rather than doing the printing at
home daily. Kelly and Chad also pitched the
same idea. Alan on the other hand got excited
about 3D printing and tried to learn more
about the printer’s capabilities and current
trends in 3D printing. All participants enjoyed
the process of changing colours of the plastic
filament and wished they had more colours to
choose from. Participants were also satisfied
with the size of the artefacts although Kelly
wanted to print bigger Flowers so that she
could use them as coasters.
Four participants, however, did not like the
idea of printing objects every day; rather, they
wished for a more flexible printing schedule.
For example, Chad added: “I should be able to
choose when and what data I can print”, while

Engagement with heart rate monitoring

Frank and Kate inquired: “Can we print an object representing

Participants felt that heart rate was an appropriate measure of

heart rate from both of us?”

representing their physical activity. Five participants were

Engaging with the artefacts

curious to see how their physical fitness was reflected in the
artefacts at the end of the day while the remaining two
participants tried to confirm whether the artefacts correctly
portrayed their exercise intensities and duration. Two
participants had previous experience of wearing a heart rate
monitor, but stated that although they had never worn the

The participants had several ideas about how to use the
printed artefacts (refer Figure 26). The Frog was the favourite
artefact and all participants suggested they were affectionate
with it. Participants particularly liked the idea that they get a
bigger Frog if they exercised more.

monitor continuously for 8 hours, doing so was not a big
problem for them. Four participants, however, felt a little
uncomfortable in wearing the heart rate monitor continuously
and they wished for a better
and less restrictive way of
recording data.

Engaging with the 3D
printing process
Most participants printed
artefacts every night before
going to bed, although two
participants skipped printing
on a couple of days, choosing
to bulk print on the weekend
instead. All participants were
excited initially to see the

Figure 25: Participants arranged their artefacts
according to the day and were amazed to see how their
shape differed based on the activity done in a day.

Page 49 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Kelly felt “It was like burning your

Flower was appreciated for its

body fats and putting them on the

aesthetic qualities

frog”. The majority of the

Four participants found the Flower

participants kept frogs stacked

artefact aesthetically pleasing and

on top of their computer screens

mentioned to me various ways of

or near to their working desks.

incorporating it into their everyday life.

The Frog also initiated a healthy
competition between Frank and

Alicia felt that she could wear them as

Kate, who tried to do more

earrings. Dave, on the other hand, was

physical activity than the other

interested in an idea of an activity flower

in order to get a bigger Frog in

garden.

return.

Figure 26: Each artefact highlighted a different aspect of
engaging with one’s physical activity data.

Graph provided insights into the day’s activity
Alan liked the Graph for its informative qualities. He
particularly enjoyed the frequent high and low peaks in
the Graph showing how active his work life is. Chad stacked all
his Graph next to each other, to compare and contrast his
progress towards a set fitness goal. Chad had a great physical
workout session on one day of the study. Looking at the
printed artefacts of that day, he happily said: “I am going to
cherish today’s graph […] see how dynamic it is […] I would put it

He placed all of the Flowers next to each other on a desk to
create the appearance of a garden. Kate, who thought of using
the Flower for decorations said: “I am going to fill a glass bowl
with water and then I will put candles on these printed flowers
and let them float on the water surface - it would make a great
decoration for my house.”

on my shelf to remind me that I did well.” Interestingly, Frank and

Ring and Dice offered insights but they were less

Kate had different views about the Graph. Kate mentioned “The

appreciated

graph is not very exciting as we can see the same on a screen. It

Three participants found the Dice informative as it made them

would be like printing something that we have already seen. I
don’t like that.”

aware of their sedentary lifestyle. Kate was particularly
unaware of the time she spends sitting each day and the Dice
artefact communicated this information to her. Noticing her
sedentary life, she said positively that she would not continue

Page 50 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

sitting for long hours and would take frequent breaks for

Printing noise and smell was unpleasant

walking or standing during the day. The Ring artefact however

As most participants kept the printer near a vent or open

was less appreciated as participants felt it did not convey
much meaning to them. Moreover, participants also questioned
its utility. Dave replied, “One has only 10 fingers, […] how many
rings can he wear?”

window, there were no complaints about the plastic smell in
general but the smell was considered unpleasant; however,
Frank and Kate commented about the lengthy and noisy
printing process, which was affecting their studies. As a result,
they moved their study activity to a different room while the

Conversations around artefacts
Many participants showed their printed artefacts to
neighbours and visitors to their home. Dave, for example,
created a clock using all his printed artefacts as shown in
Figure 27. He hung it on the wall of his study room. Interview
data suggested that artefacts generated a sense of curiosity
and sparked conversations among

printing was taking place.

Discussions
3D printing was new for all the participants, although all of
them had heard about it. I have worked with the vision that in
10 years time, most people will have a 3D printer in their
home just like a 2D printer

the visitors who did not know what

today, and therefore, I

the design represented. Participants

intended to explore the future

were enthusiastic to explain the

interactions associated with

meaning of the artefacts to the

today’s technology. Although

visitors. Kate, for example, does

further studies are needed to

voluntary work for young girls at a

understand any novelty

school on weekends, and at an

effects, this interview data

annual science and technology event

suggests that participants’

of the school, which happened

interest in the printing

during the first week of the study,

process faded over time;

she enthusiastically spoke about the

however, participants’ interest

system to the girls. She said that she

in the artefacts appeared to

plans to give some artefacts to the

have persisted over time.

girls “as a token of her heart”. Chad

Participants mentioned that

similarly gave a few of his artefacts

the objects matter to them

to his mom and sister who came to

because they reflect their

visit him one day during the study.
Alicia is planning to incorporate the
system into her IT services office.
She says: “I would like to use an

Figure 27: Dave created a clock with all his SweatAtoms.
This clock prompted conversations among visitors to his
house.

approach like this for a reward and

personal data and activities,
making them unique, as they
cannot be “bought at a market” as
mentioned by Kate. Furthermore,
the statement made by three

recognition program that we are starting. We were thinking about

participants that they would rather get the objects delivered to

giving out big stars but that is lame in comparison with these

them in the mail rather than printing them at home (to avoid

personalised 3D trinkets. I also liked the idea of rewards getting

the printing noise), further suggests that the participants were

bigger with an increase in the physical effort.”

able to differentiate between the appeal of 3D printing and

Issue of sustainability
Four participants raised issues of sustainability and pondered
over the utility of objects in their life. For example, Kelly asked
what would she do with so many artefacts if she keeps on
printing them each day. Three participants wished for a
provision to recycle these artefacts. Frank and Chad had a
common suggestion of making them all interlock with each
other to create a bigger sculpture. Kelly put forward the idea of
Lego bricks to construct a skyscraper of physical activity over
time, while Dave suggested printing of the objects only on
specific days.

personalised 3D artefacts. These anecdotes illustrate the fact
that giving a physical form to the ephemeral experience of
physical activity can facilitate a deeper engagement with the
data. In addition, personalised material rewards also prompted
physical activity amongst people who otherwise were
spending time being sedentary.
Designers can also learn from the Frog design to map a similar
reward structure into their designs. For example, the
participants welcomed scaling the size of an artefact as a
reward for the invested effort in physical activity. Participants
took an interest in decorating their homes with the artefacts.

Page 51 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

These artefacts also became a topic of conversion. The Frog

future works, it could be interesting to examine the

also prompted healthy competitions among participants for

relationship between printing time and size of the reward.

getting a bigger Frog. These narratives suggest that
personalised artefacts if designed carefully, have an ability to
extend engagement with physical activity. Although
participants appreciated the aesthetics of artefacts, their utility
as well as sustainability was equally important.

In this study, participants also liked these artefacts not only
because they were “cute”, or tangible in nature, but because
they embody their own physical activity data and represent
their past activities. Participants often discussed with their
families and visitors during the study how these artefacts

Following are four key themes that emerged from analysing

made sense in their life. The fact that these artefacts make a

the study findings.

unique and authentic self- representation in material form and

Importance of aesthetics, utility and context
Miller (2008) argued that individuals like to express
themselves with material artefacts that embody their lives,
personalities, emotions, and achievements. Similarly, study

something that they cannot purchase from elsewhere appears
to be a key factor behind the liking of these artefacts. As a
result, I see further opportunities for using material artefacts
as personalised and unique rewards for being physically active.

participants expressed themselves by placing the Frogs on

Importance of material and its lifetime

their computer monitors and decorating their home with

Despite the use of biodegradable plastic material (PLA) for

Flowers. Such an arrangement of material artefacts as physical

digital fabrication, participants raised the issue of

signs to spatially represent the identity of an individual is

sustainability and wished for the material or a system for easy

called “autotopography” (Gonzalez 1995). Material artefacts

recycling. One way to deal with the issue could be in terms of

such as Frog and Flower were not only readily displayed in

selective printing, i.e. letting participants choose and print

participants’ surroundings (Figure 26) but they also served as a

data on selective days or for special events. Another way could

memory landscape to the participants triggering reminiscence

also be with the use of temporal or edible materials. Taking

about their physical activity and events that happened during

inspiration from this finding, I built a prototype system that

the study. As such, this study supports the theory of

creates 3D printed personalised chocolates from the measured

autotopography.

heart rate data of physical activity. This system is discussed in

Interestingly, autotopography was driven mainly by the
aesthetic rather than the embodied information in the
artefacts. For example, the Frog was readily displayed in the
home ambience despite containing very little information
about an individual’s activity; in contrast, other more
informative models like Graph and Dice did not become a part
of people’s home ambience except for Chad, who placed his
Graph on the living room wall for public display to cherish his
best workout day. Designers, therefore, should consider
building artefacts that are easy to interpret, although the
embodied information can be as little as “Today, I did more
physical activity than yesterday”.

Importance of personalised rewards
Participants liked getting artefacts at the end of the day as a
reward and a testimony to their invested physical efforts. It
seemed that material rewards could contribute to an increase
in physical activity for a couple of participants. Participants
enjoyed how the Frog grew based on their physical activity and
they did more physical activity to get a bigger Frog.
Participants appreciated this scaling, even though a bigger
Frog required more printing time. I believe that the perceived

Chapter 6.

Importance of the printing process
In this work, I particularly supported a delay in feedback for
participants’ physical activity. Rather than seeing the heart rate
on a phone or a watch whilst performing a physical activity, I
chose to make users wait to see how their material artefacts
from the day’s physical activity would look. The slow
fabrication process also contributed to the delay. This waiting
was sometimes frustrating for the participants but it also
made participants felt rewarded and raised curiosity and
sparked conversations over the outcomes. In recent times,
efforts were being made to tackle the slowness of 3D printing
and make the digital fabrication process more efficient
(Mueller et al. 2014). In contrast, I would like to suggest design
researchers embrace the slowness to support a delayed
feedback on physical activity as a useful design resource.
Moreover, designers should make the process of creating
material artefacts engaging to sustain user’s interests. The
second case study, TastyBeats looks into one possible way of
making the process more engaging by the use of interactive
water fountains.

value of the artefact among the participants also increased

The above themes were fundamental in shaping the final Selfie

with the time they waited for it to get printed. Therefore, in

framework explored in Chapter 7.

Page 52 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

The next two case studies build upon this work. Particularly, I
tried to investigate whether changing the material and the
process of creating material artefacts would support these
themes or whether new themes would emerge as a result of it.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I introduced a novel system, SweatAtoms, that
creates 3D printed material artefacts of physical activity data.
With the deployment of the system SweatAtoms through an “in
the wild” study, I explored how participants’ relationship to
physical activity can be affected through the design of
material representation. I hope that this work inspires different
ways of reflecting upon material representations, especially in
the context of physical activity and sensing technology.
I also encourage design researchers to consider and
incorporate digital fabrication in their HCI design practice: in
particular, designers should consider not only trying to print
things that already exist in the material world, but rather
consider that there is an opportunity to print things from data
that exists only in the digital world, such as heart rate. I also
foresee an opportunity of having personal 3D printers at home,
as these printers can produce unique material artefacts that
are never as good as coming from large fabrication houses, but
offer more personal representations of one’s life. In the future,
I envision people crafting their world with moments from their
lives, using data that was previously only seen in digital form
but is now re-entering their physical world in a material form.
After the first case study was completed there were multiple
research direction in which to continue my work. My initial
inclination was to explore shape-changing interfaces
(Rasmussen et al. 2011; Yao et al. 2013). With this idea I would
create dynamic material artefacts that change shape in
accordance with an individual’s physical activity. As I was
exploring different ideas for the potential design and material
I could use in this prototype, I became aware of and more
interested in the medium of food as an interesting design
material for creating material representations of physical
activity. Because of the crucial role food plays within the
human energy cycle, exploring food based representations for
physical activity data seemed uniquely appealing. The next
two case studies take my work forward by introducing
consumable material representations based on my
explorations with food as a design medium. The next chapter
describes the first case study that uses sports drinks as a
material to represent physical activity data.

Page 53 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#5
TastyBeats

Page 54 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CASE STUDY 2

TastyBeats

Material used
Sports drink and water
Process followed
Interactive water fountains
Produced outcome
Personalised sports drink

Key Publication
Rohit Ashok Khot , Jeewon Lee, Deepti Aggarwal, Larissa
Hjorth, and Florian Mueller. TastyBeats: Designing
Palatable Representations of Physical Activity . In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’15).

Finalist at Premier Design awards 2015
Ethics Approval number:
CHEAN A 0000018602-04/14
Public Exhibitions

Other Publications

2014 — ACM CHI Interactivity 2014, Toronto
Canada.

TEI 2015, UIST 2013 Student innovation contest

2015 — IIT Bombay TechFest, Mumbai, India

This chapter describes the second case study that investigates the use of drinkable fluids to create
material representations of physical activity data through a system called TastyBeats.
Introduction to this chapter
This case study is the first of two explorations on consumable
material representations of physical activity. This work extends
my previous investigation on the SweatAtoms system where I
designed and studied the use of 3D printed plastic artefacts to
represent physical activity. In this case study, I introduce
“palatable representations” that turn physical activity data into
an appetising sports drink. Palatable representations expand
the view of visualising physical activity beyond the screen by

Since intense physical activity sessions can cause loss of body
fluids, sports drinks can help in the recovery of such body
fluids (Swaka et al. 2007). However, I am also aware that the
human energy-cycle is much more complex as the literature
on exercise and nutrition suggests (ibid), I therefore do not
portray that a created sports drink exactly matches the energy
expended during an hourly exercise, for instance. Rather my
interest in the sports drink is driven mainly from the
experiential angle.

providing not only a real-time and interactive fluid based

As a proof of concept, I have designed a system called

visualisation of heart rate data, but also a representation that

TastyBeats where one or two participants engage in a fluidic

can later be consumed. Palatable representations involve the

spectacle of creating an energy sports drink that matches their

use of drinkable fluids such as sports drinks to represent

heartbeat patterns. TastyBeats provides an interactive

physical activity data.

representation of a person’s heartbeat in the form of an energy
drink created by mixing different flavours.

Page 55 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Rather than simply mixing different flavours based on one’s

within a receptacle for interactive play. Peres et al. (2005)

efforts, I see an opportunity to create a fluidic spectacle that

created different water games to encourage children to play

celebrates the experience of being physically active.

together. “Water Ball Z” (Hoste and Signer 2014) is a virtual

Additionally, a fluid fountain is more public and visible and can

fighting game where children and young adults ‘fight’ each

also be touched, explored, and even tasted; thus supporting

other in a virtual world using water streams. Additionally,

some of the essential aspects of material representations as

Mann designed various fluidic musical instruments such as the

discussed in Chapter 1 and 2. As a consequence, I also believe

“Water Hammer piano” (Mann et al. 2011) and “Hydraulophone”

that such a public display of physical activity data could reveal

(Mann et al. 2006) for interactive entertainment, where user

new aspects of engagement.

interactions with water create musical tones. The Student

Fluidic Interfaces
To the best of my knowledge, there has not been any
exploration on using fluids to represent physical activity data.
However, past works however have explored fluids for creating
novel interactive experiences. The most popular example of a
fluidic interface is a public spectacle in the form of a
choreographed musical water fountain, the “Fountains of
Bellagio”8 Similarly, the “Data Fountain”9 shows relative
currency rates using a water fountain display. Within academia,
Wanatabe (2007) created a system called “Vortexbath" that
utilises tangible interactions with water in common areas like
kitchens and toilets to enable playing videos and browsing
photos on a water-based interface. Mine et al. (2011) worked
on a similar idea to control the interaction of multiple video
streams through the physical mixing of water. In other works,
Richter et al. (2013) designed water jets for providing tactile
feedback on virtual touch screen elements, while Sylvester et
al. created a “Soap Bubble Interface” (2010) to control sounds

Innovation Contest at UIST (2013) also featured various fluidic
interaction possibilities developed using the Pump Spark water
fountain kit (Dietz et al. 2014).
These works illustrate the potential of fluidic interfaces for
creating engaging experiences, yet there has not been much
work on using fluids to represent personal data, which I
consider as a missed opportunity. Inspired by this opportunity,
in this chapter, I propose TastyBeats, which is an interactive
system that utilises heart rate data of physical activity to
create a personalised sports drink. The system is described in
the next section.

TastyBeats
TastyBeats is an interactive system that transforms heart rate
data of a physical activity into a personalised drink, using a
fountain-based interaction that not only provides visualisation
of physical activity but also turns the preparation process into
a spectacular event.

and room light.

Setup

Fluidic interfaces have also been used to support interactive

The TastyBeats setup includes a central glass and four

play experiences. To begin with, Geurts and Vanden Abeele
(2012) created splash controllers that manipulate water flow

Figure 28: TastyBeats is a
water fountain based
system that creates a
fluidic spectacle of mixing
sports drinks based on
heart rate data of physical
activity.

8

http://www.bellagio.com/en/entertainment/fountains-of-bellagio.html

9

http://www.koert.com/work/datafountain/

containers (Figure 28). Each container contains a food graded
water pump (2015) fitted at the bottom of the container, which
shoots drinks from the containers into the central glass.

Page 56 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

These pumps are driven by an Arduino Uno micro-controller10 .

2007). I, therefore, chose Mio liquid enhancer (Figure 30)
containing electrolytes to represent this zone.

Working
For clarity, I explain the working of the TastyBeats system in

4) Intense activity zone: Rich flavoured water

two parts. In the first part, I explain the mapping of heart rate

The fourth zone corresponds to very intense

data to different drinks, while in the second part I describe the

physical activities with heart rate values

dynamics of the fluid spectacle as facilitated by the pumps.

between 166 to 195 bpm. Such activities
usually do not last more than 10 minutes

Part 1: mapping heart rate to different fluids

(Fletcher 2001). I choose a dark red and rich

I first divided the measured heart rate values into four zones

flavoured (Mio fruit punch flavour, Figure 31)

based on the intensity level of physical activity. I have followed

drink to describe its occurrence in a physical

Fletcher’s classification of physical activity levels according to

activity session. I discard the values below

heart rate values (2001), however, I have adjusted the range
of values slightly to suit the proposed interaction. For each
zone, I assign a drink of different flavour and colour as
explained below. In the prototype, I have used Mio11 liquid

Figure 31: Rich
flavoured liquid
enhancer

enhancers for preparing the drinks because they contain zero
sugar and zero calories. Therefore, drinking such drinks may
not add any calories to the body. In addition, these drinks come
in a variety of tasty flavours.

60 BPM and above 195 BPM as they occur
very rarely.

Dynamics of a fluid spectacle
I use a Polar H7 heart rate monitor along

with its accompanying mobile app, Polar Beat to record the
heart rate data of a physical activity session. The Polar Beat
app saves the heart rate data on the Polar website, from where
I download the heart rate data in XML format. I have written

1) Low activity zone: Water
The first zone describes activities where the user is mostly
sedentary or performing a light physical activity such as
standing and walking. This zone corresponds to a range of
heart rate values varying from 60 to 95 beats per minute
(bpm). Since there is not much physical activity happening in
this zone, I chose water to represent this zone.
2) Moderate activity zone: Lightly flavoured water

an application in Processing that identifies the pattern of heart
rate zones from the XML file and then sends this pattern to the
TastyBeats system via serial communication. This pattern
enumerates all the heart rate zones in which the heart rate
data fell in along with its frequency. For example, assuming
that the measured heart rate values are [69, 75, 83, 102, 150]
the identified heart rate pattern will be [(zone: 1, freq.: 3),
(zone: 2, freq.: 1), (zone: 3, freq.: 1)] as 69, 75 and 83
corresponds to zone 1, 102 corresponds to zone 2 and 150

The second zone corresponds to

corresponds to zone 3.

aerobic activities with a range of heart
rate values between 96 to 130 bpm. I

The user first sets up the system by pouring the described

chose lightly flavoured water (Figure

drinks into the provided containers. The TastyBeats system

29) such as mango-peach flavour to

reads the heart rate pattern sequentially and accordingly

represent this zone. The rationale

drives the pumps from the corresponding containers. The

behind doing so was to reward a user

pumps shoot the drink into the central glass for 2 seconds, so

for starting a physical activity with an
appetising flavour.
3) High activity zone: Electrolytes
Figure 30:
Electrolytes
drink

Figure 29: Light
flavoured liquid
enhancer

The third zone describes
aerobic activities with high
intensity and corresponds to a
range of heart rate values

between 131 to 165 bpm. Such activities if
done for a longer duration may require
electrolyte supplements (Sawka et al.

10

http://www.arduino.cc

11

http://makeitmio.com

that the central glass can accommodate multiple shots from
every container. The central glass is full with 30 shots with a
total of 400 ml.
The volume of the drink depends upon how much heart rate
data has been recorded while the flavour of the drink depends
upon the variation found in the identified heart rate pattern.
For a longer period of physical activity, for example 7-8 hours, I
optimised the system so that it shoots the drink only when the
heart rate pattern moves to a different zone. For example, if
the heart rate data started in zone 1 and stayed in the same
zone, shooting will happen only once from pump 1.

Page 57 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

The volume of the drink is based on the duration of the

Phase 1: Focussed group discussion and prototyping

physical activity and monitored data. I programmed the

I conducted a focus group discussion to generate and refine

system in a way that it stops when the recorded heart rate
pattern is over or the glass becomes full with 30 shots.

the ideas around the design of the TastyBeats system. The
focus of the discussion was mainly on the fountain based

Since heart rate data varies over time and differs between

interaction, which lasted about an hour and had 7 (4 male, 3

different individuals the flavour of the drink will

female) participants aged between 25 to 40 years.

be distinctly personalised for different
activities. For example, an activity comprising of
transitions between low and moderate activity
zones will add water and light flavoured water
respectively into the central glass, while an
activity causing rapid transitions between
different zones will add more flavours as well
as electrolytes to the drink (refer Figure 32).
The user is then welcome to taste the prepared
drink that summarises his/her physical activity.
Figure 32: TastyBeats in
action.

Design process

The participants were recruited from the community

I have taken an incremental and exploratory approach for

surrounding a research lab and came from varied academic

designing the TastyBeats system where the data gathered from

backgrounds: HCI, industrial design, and media arts. I draw

an earlier trial would inform the design of the system in the

from their experience and discuss advanced topics, such as

next trial. The design inquiry for TastyBeats was carried out in

engaging aspects of the water fountain interface.

three phases. In the first phase, the main concepts of the
prototype were fleshed out through group discussions and
iterative prototyping. In the second phase, I exhibited early
versions of the TastyBeats systems at three different academic
venues where more than 400 participants interacted with the
system and over 3000 bystanders have watched the
interactions as they happened.
Each of these exhibitions helped to refine the design,
extending the system and resolving any usability issues. In the
final phase, I field deployed the system in various houses to
study its use in an everyday context. I describe the activities
that are carried out in each of these three phases in detail
below:

Figure 33: Other potential
design ideas that were
discussed but not
considered due to a) less
interaction with
equidistant pumps b) selfpriming issue with the
pumps.

Each focus group discussion started with debriefing and
explanation of the system along with its motivation. To guide
the discussion mainly on the interaction part, I fixed some of
the parameters of the system such as that the used data for
interactions was heart rate and I limited the choice of drinks to
flavoured waters and sports drinks.
During the focus group, I asked the participants to collectively
or individually come up with different possible designs on
paper for a water fountain based interactive system. Various
ideas emerged for the possible interface as shown in Figure
33.

Page 58 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Having access to digital fabrication tools like 3D printers

just a visualisation of their heart rate data, but there was also

helped to quickly turn the paper sketches into an early

a drinkable reward associated with it. They were able to

working prototype. However, I was limited by the hardware

correlate the created drink with their heart rate: “It’s really cool

(pumps) available to me, which lead to discarding some of the

to see how what I just did is now somehow in the glass!”

design ideas. For example, the pumps I had were not self-

Unfortunately, one caveat of the exhibition was that

priming (the pump casing must be filled with liquid before the

participants were not allowed to taste the created drink due to

pump is started, or the pump will not be able to function. If the

the exhibitions’ policies on food regulation. Participants

pump casing becomes filled with vapours or gasses, the pump

showed interest in knowing the ingredients and wanted to

impeller becomes gas-bound and incapable of pumping), they

know if they can choose their favourite flavours if they were to

needed to be immersed in the water to function properly. As a

use the system at home.

result, I had to discard some designs that had pumps separated
from the water with a tube. After a few rounds of iterations and
discussions, I decided on the following design that had all
pumps at equidistance from the central glass as shown in
Figure 32. Choosing this design also allowed for better use of
varied heights when shooting drinks into the central container.

Furthermore, dynamics of the fluid interaction provided a
momentary pleasure of being physically active, while the
visual and sound effects of fluids intrigued people and
motivated the use of the system. Participants were mostly
excited about how many different coloured drinks they could
get in a glass and what activities could increase their heart

Phase 2: public exhibitions

rate in a short period of time. In consequence, they were

TastyBeats was exhibited in three different international

enthusiastically engaged in the interaction to beat each other’s

academic exhibition events that cater to large audiences. In
total, more than 400 participants directly interacted with the
system, while audiences cheered on the participants. Figure 34
shows an example of TastyBeats being exhibited at the
academic exhibition. In these demonstrations, I have used a
finger worn Pulse heart rate monitor to record the heart rate

heart rate and joked about the different outcomes. Participants
tried different physical activities such as push-ups, jumping
and running to raise their heart rate, whereas some utilised
“tricks” such as controlled breathing to achieve the same
outcome. Sometimes the heart rate was also raised with
emotions such as thrill and

data, instead of a chest strap based heart rate monitor.

surprise related to experiencing

Participants were from a diverse background of academics and

also got involved by tickling their

professionals from engineering and HCI backgrounds. Their
age varied from 18-60 years. Participants shared their
experience through verbal conversations while interacting
with the system. I also had a brief discussion with about 70
participants afterwards to
understand the potential of
how TastyBeats could integrate
into their day-to-day activity. I
describe below the insights
gained from observations and
conversations with
participants.
The overall response from the
participants was positive and
encouraging. Participants
appreciated the novelty and
playful nature of the
interaction with TastyBeats in
comparison to the routine way
of checking heart rate data on
a screen. Participants
particularly enjoyed the fact
that the interaction was not

the system socially. The audience
friends who were interacting with
the system and by loudly
cheering them on.

Figure 34: Participants
were thrilled to see how
their heart rate data is
turned into a fluidic form
in the early version of the
TastyBeats system.

Page 59 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

As a result, the interaction became a public spectacle of

The participants also mused on the possible design

someone’s physical activity and every attempt was encouraged

considerations for home-based deployments of the TastyBeats

and applauded by the audience.

system.

Sometimes, due to accidental movements or low levels of

A group of 5 participants (4 male and 1 female) participated in

fluids inside the containers, the fluid was spilled on the nearby

the discussion to discover potential problems and

surface of the system. To my surprise, spilling made the

opportunities to ensure that the deployments were well

interaction more dramatic. Participants considered it as a part

executed. The group was mostly comprised of PhD students

of their performance to get the desired outcome of shooting

and academics with experience in the field of HCI. The review

the fluid correctly into the central glass. For example, one

took on the shape of a more formal usability inspection, where

participant felt that she did not deserve the drink because of

the group discussed the merits and weaknesses. In particular,

an “average” performance and that was why the drink spilled

participants did not like keeping all four containers at

over the table surface.

equidistance from the central glass. They suggested that

Although users could identify the heart rate zone in which
their heart rate was falling in, they could not see the exact
heart rate value. Furthermore, there was a short delay between
the measured heart rate and the fluidic outcome because of
the lag in reading the sensor data and initiating the water
pumps. As a result, participants did not know what would
happen and when: “From where does the water come out and
how much will spill?”. On the one hand, the delay was
sometimes frustrating as participants felt that there was
something wrong with either their body or the system. On the
other hand, the delay also invoked fun conversations as
participants teased each other, “You are a zombie!”, “You don’t

putting containers in sequential order rather than in circle
around the central glass would give more interaction
flexibility. For example, containers that are further apart from
the central glass can have higher elevation for the water arc
than the containers that are closer to the central glass. Some
members suggested using different colours for different drinks
but some were also sceptical over the colour composition of
the drinks and instead prompted to use transparent flavours so
that the end drink appears as a surprise. Some members
suggested using carbonated water and ice along with the
flavoured water, but I had to discard this suggestion as the
pumps I had did not work with carbonated water.

have a heart (beat)”. But it also encouraged more efforts from

I redesigned the system using the feedback I got from the

the participants as they tried to increase their heart rate

group as well as taking into considerations the suggestions

through different activities.

made by the participants from the public demonstrations of

Some participants raised concerns about the safety of the
created drink. The interaction also challenged their notion of
whether it is good to play with food (drinkable fluids). In
follow-up discussions, some participants also hinted towards a
clean and tidy setup, where the fluid interaction could be akin
to a coffee machine setup and fluid will flow downward rather
than shooting upwards.

the system. The final version of the system can be seen in
Figure 28 and is described earlier. I next conducted a field
study with the redesigned system to understand its use in an
everyday context.

TastyBeats in action (field study)
I conducted an exploratory “in the wild” study to understand
how TastyBeats could integrate into everyday physical activity

In summary, the public rendering of heart rate data in a fluidic

experiences and what effect it could have on individuals and

form made participants laugh, cheer, expressive and playful

their relationship with everyday physical activity. Given the

with their personal heart rate data and encouraged different

exploratory nature of this work, which targets fluidic media to

physical activities. This suggested to me that there is a

visualise physical activity, my method focused on gathering a

potential to use fluidic interaction to support the experience of

rich set of opinions rather than a majority opinion over

being physically active, however, there were also a few

whether, and in what ways, fluidic media could support the

concerns regarding the design and spilling of drinks when

visualisation of physical activity. As such, I lean on the ideas of

exploring the fluidic interaction with the data. Hence, I decided

cultural probing and “in the wild” explorations that aim to

to hold another focus group discussion before deploying the

encourage reflective thinking about a system and its usage in

system in the field.

everyday context.

Phase 3: Focus group discussion and field deployments

Recruitment

I conducted another round of focus group discussions to

The study took place in five households across Melbourne,

understand the usability aspects of the design.

Australia for a period of two weeks. In total, eight participants
(names changed) took part in the study: 1 couple in their mid

Page 60 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

thirties (Chad: 37 yrs., Male, Sarah: 34 yrs., Female), 1 couple in

Tasks in the morning

their mid twenties (Dave: 28 yrs., Male, Sarah: 26 yrs.), two

I asked the participants to put on the heart rate monitor and

housemates (Adam: 26 yrs. Male, Rahim: 29 yrs., Male) and two
students from separate houses (Daisy: 27 yrs. Female, Gavin: 26
yrs.). The fact that some of the houses had more than one
person participating in the study allowed me to investigate the
social dynamics of the TastyBeats system as explored in
previous work on material representations (Stusak et al. 2014).
Figure 35 provides demographic details of the participants
along with their level of physical activity every week (low: 1–2
days, moderate: 3–4 days, high: more than 4 days). Dave, Chad,
Daisy, and Rahim had previously used heart rate

start recording the data using the Polar Beat application
installed on the iPod touch. Usually, participants began the
recording around 8 am in the morning. Once the recording was
started, participants continued their day as usual while
carrying the iPod with them. I did not deliberately ask
participants to start any new physical activity but they were
welcomed to do so. I asked them to spend their day during the
study as they normally would do, which may or may not
involve physical activity.

monitors while Dave, Chad and Sarah have also used a
physical activity related app such as RunKeeper and
MyFitnessPal previously. Participants mentioned that
they have used electrolytes-based sports drinks before,
but mainly they relied on water as a resource for
rehydration. I also asked in pre-study interviews about
the participants’ preferences in terms of drinks and
what features they think are vital for selecting a drink.
Most participants noted that taste is the key aspect for
them to choose the drink while, for Rose and Sarah,
drink packaging was important as well as colour and
taste.

Study setup
I supplied each participant with a bag containing a MacBook
Air, a Polar H7 heart rate monitor and a 5th generation iPod
touch to record heart rate data along with the TastyBeats

Figure 36: Demographic details of the study
participant along with their level of physical activity.
Mod. active means moderately active

setup. I refrained from using the participants’ smartphones
because I did not want to drain smartphone batteries from
constant heart rate monitoring. I gave participants sanitisers
and napkins for cleaning and managing accidental drink spills.
Participants were not compensated for participating in the
study. Following cultural probing practice, I also supplied
diaries and asked participants to reflect upon their experiences
with the system.

Procedure
I installed the TastyBeats system in every household in a
location of the participants’ choice (which I noted). I
explained the study procedure and gave participants a
hands-on demo on how to use the system. An A3 poster
detailing the study steps, as shown in Figure 35, was given to
the participants. Participants were asked to perform the
following tasks:
Figure 35: Each house received a kit containing
the TastyBeats system, iPods and a A3 poster
detailing the study steps.

Tasks in the evening
In the evening, usually around 6 pm, I told participants to stop
the Polar Beat application and take off the heart rate monitor.
Once the recording was stopped, the heart rate data from the
day was synced to the Polar website.

Page 61 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Participants then prepared the TastyBeats setup, which
involved pouring water into the four containers and adding the
liquid enhancers (two drops) into three of them as explained
earlier. The provided laptop was used to download the data
and start the TastyBeats program. The program then started the
TastyBeats interaction, which involved shooting drinks into the
central glass based on the heart rate data. The fluidic
interaction usually lasted around 3-4 minutes, giving users
between 200 and 400 ml of drink. Participants were then
welcomed to taste the drink and had the opportunity to reflect
on their experience in the provided diary.

Findings
Given the long time frame necessary to achieve health benefits
as a result of physical activity, it is often difficult to judge the
efficacy of short design-led study interventions (Brynarsdttir et
al. 2012; Klasnja et al. 2011; Purpura et al. 2011). Instead, it
has been suggested that such interventions should be judged
based on their impact on practices (Brynarsdttir et al. 2012)
and how they brought about changes in people’s attitudes
(rather than behaviours), fostering mindfulness and leaving
room for stories (Purpura et al. 2011). I describe below key
insights gained from the deployments.

Accommodating TastyBeats
All participants welcomed the system with curiosity
and considered it a part of their kitchen ambiance.
The system occupied a space on the kitchen slab in
both couples’ homes (Figure 37). Adam and Rahim,
however, placed the system in a private room as one
of their other roommates had a cat and they
thought she might mess with the system.

Experiencing TastyBeats
All participants tracked their data for around 7-8
hours in the time period between 9 am to 6pm. The
couples preferred to have their drink after dinner
usually around 9 pm. Dave mentioned that the drink
was like a personalised dessert or pleasurable treat
for the tiring activity of the day. Referring to the

Data source

Figure 37: The TastyBeats system occupied the
kitchen slab space in Dave and Rose’s house.

Complementing the prestudy interviews, the main
source of data were the diaries and the post-study interviews
conducted at the end of the study in participants’ homes. The
pre-study interview lasted around 30 minutes while the post-

sweet taste of the drink Sarah said: “It is like having
a grape juice before going to bed”. Adam and Rahim
did not have a preferred time for the drink;
sometimes they had it just after coming back from
work and some other times a little later. To my

surprise, Adam even maintained voice memos on his iPod to
log his as well as Rahim’s interactions with the system.

study interviews lasted for about 60 minutes per participant. In

Enjoying the interaction

the post-interviews, I focused on eliciting participants’

All participants actively took part in making the drink every

experiences with the TastyBeats system to supplement their
written feedback in the diaries. I also utilised photos and
videos taken by the participants to further support the
interviews. I visited each household two times (on the first and
last day of the study) and spent around 4 hours in total with
participants at each house. During the study, I also maintained
contact with everyone through emails and phone calls in case
they needed any technical support. However, the study ran
smoothly and the required technical support was minimal. I
also took notes and recorded interviews, which were later
coded and analysed for common themes.

day and keenly observed how the drink was being made
through the fountain-based interaction. As such, the system
became a part of their daily routine. According to Adam, the
system was “Something you always want to see, once you come
home”, to which Rose added, “It’s nice to see the machine making
a drink and the taste of the drink is also very good, but it is also
very healthy, that way you feel good about it.” The drink was
appreciated and interaction was found rewarding by the
participants: “The best part of it is watching the interaction,
shooting into the cup”, Dave commented. Rose was delighted to
see her heart rate transformed into a drink, she mentioned,
“Compared to regular apps which only show the data, this

Page 62 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

prepares the drink, and that way it’s kind of special, it feels that

the dark red coloured drink], I felt my pulse for the first time. It

you are getting energy back.”

made me think about the reasons and found that medication is

Taste as a surprise
Sarah mentioned, “Seeing the drink is one thing, but if it’s

one of the factors [she was on a medication for a while during the
study period].”

the same colour every day, then there is no surprise. The
surprise is the taste, which is different on a daily basis.”

Taste as a satisfaction
Chad also commented, “Tasting it [drink] adds an element
of satisfaction. It would have been less engaging if I was
not allowed to drink it.” Adam felt, “it is like drinking your
own progress, literally.”

Witnessing the interaction
Chad mentioned, “This (TastyBeats) is kind of neat where I
can see the different levels mixing in. You actually get to
interpret how active your day was based on the drink being
mixed. So, I think it’s more of an incentive to see it mixed
because you get a better understanding of why the drink is
the way it is.” (Refer Figure 38). For Rahim, it was like
watching a favourite TV show. He added, “It is something
that you want to enjoy as entertainment. It is like watching
a show that you like.”
Figure 38: Watching the interaction was
both fun and rewarding. The image is
taken from one of the exhibitions of the
TastyBeats system.

Relating TastyBeats to physical activity
Participants mentioned that the presented data in its fluid
form offered new insights into their physical activity routines.
As a result, they became more attentive to their bodily
responses and everyday activities.

Trying out different activities to get a better drink
Participants were able to correlate different days’ activities
with the drink that was created in the evening, which in turn
encouraged them to try new physical activities. Rose tried
different physical activities such as running, cycling and
household cleaning on different days. She was able to
differentiate how her heart rate data in these activities was
reflected in the drink. Rahim confirmed this by saying: “I did see
the differences [in the drink] when I had a more active day, there

Motivation for exercise
A recurrent theme was the motivating quality of the system,
linking to the theme of fulfilling the energy-cycle. Participants
reported that the system encouraged them to not miss their
daily workouts. Rose said: “Just to see what drinks you get and
how much, you feel like going out and running, sometimes it’s like
an inspiration.” Adam responded similarly, “It motivated me to
exercise more”. Daisy added, “Watching the drink actually gives
you motivation, like seeing the 3 (one of the drink zones) and 4
going, you want more from 4”.

were subtle changes in the taste.”

On a sedentary day, Chad received a drink containing mostly

Identifying bodily signals from the drink colour

watery drink, but it was not unexpected. That kind of motivated

water, to which he replied, “It was a little bit frustrating to get a

The dark rich flavoured drink that Sarah received on three

me to want more physical exercise the next day. I would try

consecutive sedentary days made her realise that she had very

something to get drinks from level 3 and 4.”

high heart rates. She told her husband about it and
consequently they investigated “normal” heart rate values on

Taking health more seriously

the Internet and possible reasons for higher heart rate values.

Dave spoke extensively about how TastyBeats made him be

They then tried to swap around the heart rate monitor on the

more serious about his as well as his wife’s health. He said, “I

next day to see if there was a fault with it. Sarah said: “What it

will continue cycling to work from now onwards”. Other

[TastyBeats] made me aware of was my heart rate. It is not

participants also reported that the system encouraged them to

something that I think of. When I saw my high heart rate [through

not miss their daily workouts.

Page 63 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Dave, Rose, and Chad started walking or cycling to work

Rahim responded, “I actually had a competition, I am doing better

instead of driving or taking public transport.

than you and you are doing better than me. Every day I sat down

Nudging towards healthy eating habits
Rahim mentioned that “It feels like maybe I should eat less and
drink more.” Gavin noted similarly that, “I earlier used to eat junk

(in front of the system setup) to see who did what. If I had a good
day, it felt good, I defeated you. It got me into an athlete mood
where you always want to compete.”

food after returning home from work but now I only drink the

Drinks became personal and cheating felt bad

drink made by the system and that is enough, it somehow

Adam added, “Later on, the same day when I was having dinner, I

prohibits me from eating junk food.” Daisy felt the system is like,

felt like having a drink. So what I did, I cheated the system. I

“Walking around with a nutritionist, telling me what I did and

uploaded Rahim’s data and got the same drink that he got. Kind of

what I should eat. “

funny that he did the activities and I got the drink. But actually, to

Social dynamics around TastyBeats
Participants said that they often prepared their drinks together,
laughing and discussing their activities with each other.
Usually, participants saw each other only in the evening when

be honest, it didn’t feel good at all, I felt that what I told Rahim
too, you know what, this drink is personal, I feel like it is yours and
I am drinking it. It feels like drinking something that does not
belong to me. So it did not taste good, really honestly.”

the recording of the data was over. As such they did not know

Personal affection with the drink

precisely how active the other person was during the day: the

Participants from the other houses felt that the drink was

understanding came by watching the interaction when the

personal to them and is not something to be shared: Rose said,

other person’s drink was being made. Chad said in the

“Sharing my drink with others is a bit weird, I will tell others

interview, “It's good that me and Sarah doing it [the study]

about it [my drink], but I will not share the drink, definitely.”

together, as I get to see each other’s heart rate from the drinks
being made” [with a smile], “in that way, Sarah now knows much

Watching the interaction was a rewarding experience

more about me and my activities.”

Most participants spoke enthusiastically about the system as

Facilitating competition

Interestingly, participants found the interaction equally

well as about their participation in the study with their friends.

Adam felt the system was highly competitive (refer Figure 39):

rewarding as the drink. Sarah said: “Even if you had a pretty

he competed in terms of who will burn more calories and get a

inactive day, you can get a little bit of juice from container 2 along

better drink. He recalled a funny incident that happened

with water”. Chad added, “I think it’s better to see the interaction.

through his voice memo. “On Saturday, I stayed at home reading

If I was thirsty, it’s a little bit frustrating that you have to set it up

and watching TV, I did not go anywhere, but my friend Rahim went

and then you have to wait. But seeing the interaction is quite

and played some sport [football with friends] and did some

rewarding.”

jogging and stuff like that, so it was very physically active day for
him and for me it was very, very inactive, just the opposite. When
he came back, I did our drinks [together]. I started with him and
his drink was pretty amazing and very concentrated, using a lot of
drink from [container] 3 and 4 and almost nothing from 1. After
that it was my turn since there was no activity by me, I did not get
anything, just a little bit of water [from container 1] and nothing
from the other. It was just funny. It was so obvious that he did a lot
of activities and I got what I deserved. So I started laughing, it was
so fun!” .

Figure 39: TastyBeats facilitated a
healthy competition in terms of who will
get a better quality drink.

Rahim recalled that “One day I came home running from my
office, I was exhausted and needed something to drink, I could
have picked something from the fridge, but instead, I poured the
drink into the glasses and then drank it once the interaction was
over, that way I knew what my heart rate was.” Gavin said every
day while returning home, it was like “I cannot wait to see the
results, let us see what happens [today]”.

Page 64 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Appreciating the palatability

Cumbersome heart rate monitoring

During the post-study interviews, I discussed various possible

Rose and Sarah found wearing the heart rate monitor for the

scenarios in which certain aspect of the interaction could be

whole day cumbersome. Sarah said, “You need a little bit of

missing. I asked what if I take away the drinkable aspect by

discipline for putting it on every day during the rush hours in

just mixing colourful water based on heart rate data. To which,

the morning.” Gavin and Daisy felt skin sensitivity with the

all participants responded negatively. Chad said, “It would

strap to be a major issue during the study. Rahim added,

probably be less of incentive especially when you are wearing the

“Somehow I subconsciously felt like I am being tested. I would

heart rate monitor for exercise and at last you can’t drink it. It is

prefer a less obstructive system.” Adam proposed a solution:

like producing something but you won’t get a reward out of it,

“Eventually I will come to know what drink I get for what activity.

other than some water which you can’t keep with you” Dave

So next time when I had a similar activity, I can just look back in

worried that “Having a drink is something like a reward for what

history and plug in the data to get a similar drink, that way I do

you have done. But if it was just water, which you have to throw

not need to wear the heart rate monitor.”

away, the beauty of interaction would have disappeared.”

Doubling the calories

Welcoming the abstract form of visualisation

Since the system did not have any component that could

Dave appreciated the abstract nature of TastyBeats and

measure the food participants had during the day, the drink

mentioned, “For a non-athlete like me, detailed data does not

components felt like having additional calories to drink. “It

make much sense, once in awhile you may want to know what

gives me the feeling that whatever fat I have burned, I am putting

your heart rate details are, but on a daily basis abstract

them back on by eating the same food because that is not the

interpretation of data is good enough”.

only time I eat or drink, so the timing should be flexible. So the
calories are now doubled, it should somehow monitor what else I

The drink afforded the “feel-good” factor
Most participants felt good about themselves as the study
intervention allowed them to learn more about themselves.
Adam said, “After watching my heart rate (as conveyed in the

am eating throughout the day.” Daisy was similarly somewhat
skeptical, she mentioned, “It feels like all the work that I did, I
drink it back into myself.”

drink) and the kind of activities that I do, it made me feel better

Irregular sized drinks

about myself. I thought I was in a bad shape because I eat a lot of

With the TastyBeats system, the volume of the drink is based on

junk food, but even after eating a lot of junk food, it made me

the duration of physical activity and its type. As participants’

realise that even if I do little activity my heart rate is good and I

activities varied during the study period, they received drinks

burn a few calories. I am in not in a bad shape, which makes you

of different volume. However, Dave did not like getting drinks

feel good.”

of different volumes and wished to have a standard size drink
irrespective of the duration of his physical activity.

Issues with the TastyBeats system
Below I mention some of the issues raised by the participants

The leftovers

about the system.

Participants also raised questions in terms of the openness of
the system, which leads to the wastage of leftover drinks. Dave
and Adam asked if the system could somehow be sealed from
the top so that they can reuse the remaining drinks on some
other day rather than throwing them out.

Mess and Spilling
Spilling occurred occasionally, which was perceived as playful
but was not appreciated, as it required not only cleaning but
also is related to the wasting of food (refer Figure 40). Rose
said, “Little droplets are kind of okay.
Figure 40: Spilling was an issue which
on one hand made system playful but
on the other hand required cleaning and
caused wastage of drink. Figure shows
an early prototype of the TastyBeats
system.

But not too much.” Rahim thought
maybe it was his fault that he did
not set up the system properly.

Page 65 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Study limitations

other’s physiological state, which in turn triggered discussions

There were two main limitations to the study. Firstly, TastyBeats

and playful social interactions between them. Participants

creates a drink only at the end of the day. There are situations
when such a drink might be needed right after completing
some physical activity, an aspect I did not explore in this case
study. The current system was not portable so the drink was
served sometime after completion of some physical activity.
Secondly, the study reports on results from 2-weeks.
Longitudinal studies might be needed before drawing
conclusions on the motivational aspects of the system. Despite
these limitations, I believe this work offers first insights into a
palatable representation that could inform future systems

often competed to get a bigger drink which resulted in
moments of laughter when the prepared drinks were
drastically different from each other. Recently, some work has
also started to explore public consumption of heart rate data.
For example, Walmink et al. (2014) created an augmented
helmet that projects heart rate data of the wearer in real time
to fellow cyclists while Curmi et al. (2013) allowed for a public
display of heart rate data over social networks. These works
also suggest the potential for social interaction around the
public sharing of heart rate data. However, public displays of

around the idea of supporting the human energy cycle.

heart rate data raise issues of privacy. Within this study,

Discussion

abstract. Therefore, I believe, one way to address privacy could

The deployment and development of TastyBeats led to many
interesting insights. Participants seemed to enjoy the system
although as explained there were limitations to the study and

participants did not raise such a concern, as the data was very
be to deploy abstract forms of visualisations, supported by
systems like TastyBeats, which provides only basic information
about the physical activity in terms of four heart rate zones,

system itself. Here, I further articulate the possible

hiding details from the user and observers.

opportunities revealed from the deployment of this case study.

Importance of autonomy and self-expression

Importance of personalisation and ephemerality

Sheridan (2010) defines physical creativity as the ability to

The TastyBeats system offers an appetising drink and a visceral

innovate through exertion to acquire skills and agility; it

spectacle of creating the drink, both of which participants
found rewarding. In Chad’s case, even though he was
dehydrated from cycling, he waited for the interaction to end
to get a drink. Participants found watching the interaction to
be the best part of TastyBeats and were very keen to witness
the interaction not only for their own benefit, but to also
witness their partner’s physical activity for that day.
I found that participants had a personal affection for the
drinks. Rose was motivated to perform different physical
activities to see how the different activities would be reflected
in the drink and how the taste would be altered. One
participant, Adam, even tried to cheat the system by creating
drinks from his friend’s data, but that drink did not taste good
for him. Lastly, there was always a surprise element associated
with how the drink would taste. I, therefore, encourage
designers to equally focus on the interaction aspects as well as
the palatability of the resultant drink when designing

involves the use of body movements for self-expression,
improvisation, and imaginative play. In the TastyBeats system,
participants liked how a drink became a celebration of their
physical activity along with an opportunity to express
themselves in front of a large cheering crowd. As such, the
fluidic spectacle of one’s heart rate data becomes a public
display of the self (Goffman 1959), allowing the participants to
be imaginative and creative with their movements. Designers,
therefore, can utilise public display to nurture physical
creativity.
The public fluidic display of heart rate data facilitated creative
and exertive self-expression among participants even when
the system did not reveal the exact values of heart rate data or
the information about how it attains a fluidic form. For
participants, the dynamics of the fluidic interaction were more
engaging then the actual activity information. Following the
framework of Reeves et al. (2005) on spectator experience, I

palatable representations of physical activity data.

recommend to designers to consider abstract visualisations of

Importance of visibility and interactivity of the process

transformed into a new representation) and “expressive” (to

Most of the existing works in visualising physical activity is
geared towards individual use (Lupton 2016). Physical activity
data is often collected and shown on a private computer or
smartphone screen. In this work, I explored a public display of
data in a private setting, such as the home, through a shared
system of seeing a drink being created. Often, participants
came together to see their drinks being made. In witnessing
this process, the participants became more aware of each

data using fluids by being “secretive” (on how data gets
support exertive self- expression and spectator engagement).
In TastyBeats, spilling was accidental and often caused a mess
on nearby surfaces. On the one hand, participants welcomed
the spillage as a dramatic outcome of the playful interaction.
On the other hand the messiness challenged participant’s
notion of playing with drinkable fluids, since for some of them,
food is normally not to be played with.

Page 66 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Encouraging the users to play around with drinkable fluids
could provide an opportunity to facilitate immersive
engagement that can further entice the user to fulfil a daily
need of obtaining appropriate fluid intakes (Sawka et al. 2007).

Conclusion
The main contribution of this work is the first conceptual
understanding of the design of palatable representations of
physical activity data. I presented results from an “in the wild”
field deployment of the TastyBeats system that offers insights
into how people understand and react to personal data when
presented in a palatable form. TastyBeats served as a mediator
for reflective thoughts and discussions besides offering a
public and vibrant spectacle of heart rate data.
Recent advancements in food printing have opened up new
possibilities for creating engaging interactions and
experiences around food (Schoning et al 2012; Spence and
Piqueras-Fiszman 2013, Comber et al. 2013). However, existing
explorations mainly utilise mechanical and time-consuming
techniques to produce food. Through this work, I explore
another dimension of producing personalised food using a
vibrant, attractive and familiar setting of water fountains,
which I think would guide designers towards thinking
differently about food printing methods. As such, this work also
informs the design of food printing machines, highlighting an
opportunity to print things we do not currently have such as
heart rate. My work brings to the fore the idea that one can eat
one’s own data such as heart rate data. This might inspire a
discussion of the role of HCI in the human-energy cycle. In the
future, it would also be interesting to see how TastyBeats is
applicable in other settings such as in gymnasiums or public
events like marathons. Finally, this work has scratched only the
surface of palatable representation, and I encourage designers
to consider new possibilities afforded by such representations
to support user’s experience with the physical activity. In the
next case study, I explore one such possibility with the use of
chocolate as a representation medium.

Page 67 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#6
EdiPulse

Page 68 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CASE STUDY 3

EdiPulse

Material used
Chocolate

Key Publications:

Process followed
3D food printing

Ethics Approval number:

Produced outcome
3D printed chocolates

Public Exhibitions

Key Media Coverage

CHI Work in Progress 2015

Channel 9 News, ABC News 24, Mashable,
SpringWise, 3WM Radio, PSFK

CHEAN A 0000018602-04/14

Finalist at AAMIA awards 2016

2013 — ACM CHI 2015, Seoul, Korea.

This chapter describes the final case study that investigates the use of chocolate to create material
representations of physical activity data through a system called EdiPulse.
Introduction to this chapter
The final case study continues my exploration on food as a
representation medium. Ingold (2013) and Nissen et al. (2014)
argue that individuals can relate to material artefacts by
having a sensuous engagement or an emotional resonance
with its integral materials. Building on this idea, I explore an
opportunity to represent physical activity data in a unique
material form — chocolate — with which most individuals share
an affective relationship (Lupton 1998).

cardiovascular benefits (Steinberg et al. 2003). Interestingly,
chocolate is associated with both positive and negative
connotations, especially in relation to supporting an active
lifestyle. For example, chocolate, on one hand, is desirable,
while on the other hand, it is also considered calorie laden.
Therefore, using chocolate to represent physical activity data
might appear to conflict with one’s fitness goals. I, however,
think that this contrast adds playfulness and intrigue to one’s
perspective on looking at self-monitored data. As such, using
chocolate as a material becomes an interesting case to study

In the words of Lupton (1998), “chocolate is culturally

how individuals react to seeing their physical activity data in

understood as the symbol of love, packaged with high emotions to

chocolate form.

inspire the feeling of self-indulgence and hedonistic ecstasy”.
Besides, it has been shown that a moderate amount of
chocolate can improve mood and even offers

To explore the relationship of chocolate based representations
of physical activity data I present a system called EdiPulse.
EdiPulse amalgamates food and physical activity data in a

Page 69 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

unique playful way and by offering 3D printed chocolates as
activity treats, whose quantity remains the same irrespective of
the user’s physical activity, but these treats become more
gratifying with an increase in physical activity.

Related Work
Several works within HCI have explored food as a celebratory
technology (Grimes et al. 2008). Resner (2001), for example,
introduced the concept of an “Edible User Interface” (EUI) that
utilises multi-sensory experiences of food to create novel
interfaces such as “TasteScreen”, where users interact with a
system by licking liquid residue of different flavours that drips
onto the LCD screen (Maynes-Aminzade 2008). Murer et al.
(2013) designed “LOLLio”, a gustatory interface for playing
games. “Qkies” (2007) is a system that embeds QR codes on
cookies while “Meta Cookie” (Narumi et al. 2010) is an
augmented reality based system that aims to control
nutritional intake by changing the size of the food (cookie)
through a head-mounted display.

create decorative edible objects.
For example, Biedermann and Thill utilised food printing to
create smooth easy-to-eat foods for the elderly who have
difficulty in swallowing food (2015). Wei et al. (2014)
harnessed food printing as a social food based messaging
system for friends and relatives to communicate with each
other. In a similar vein, Fukuchi et al. (2012) invented laser
cooking that uses the laser cutter and image processing
techniques to cook food according to the shape and
composition of the ingredients. To date, there has not been any
exploration on using food printing to support physical activity
experiences, which I explore in this case study.

EdiPulse
EdiPulse is a provocative system that translates heart rate data
from a person’s active life into 3D printed chocolate treats. I
refer to these 3D printed chocolates as activity treats, as they
come in a moderate amount and offer a unique playful
representation of one’s physical activity data. These activity

Dietary monitoring is another dimension of exploration. Some

treats are constructed with less than 20 grams of dark

researchers have also looked at tracking food consumption

chocolate and they embody four different forms: Graph, Flower,

from the way it is prepared and served. For example, Chang et

Emoji and Slogan (Figure 41). While this quantity remains the

al. (2006) created a dining table that tracks food consumption

same irrespective of the user’s physical activity, these treats

using RFID and weight sensors. Similarly, Kranz et al. (2007)

become more gratifying with an increase in physical activity.

designed augmented kitchen knives and cutting boards.

The design of Graph and Flower, is similar to those found in the

Finally, there are also a number of playful systems that

first case study SweatAtoms while I introduce two new

promote healthy eating habits through persuasive games such

representations in the form of Emoji and Slogan in this study.

as “Escape from Diab” (Thompson et al. 2010) and
“LunchTime” (Orji et al. 2012). These works highlight the
potential benefits from the amalgamation of food and
technology design to support health and
wellbeing.
Advancements in food printing
technologies have brought us new
interaction possibilities with food. Food
printing follows an additive
manufacturing process where an object
is created by placing the edible material
(currently in the form of a paste,
extruded using a syringe) layer by layer
until the object, based on a 3D model, is
fully formed. As such, this process
connects digital information with
cooking. The area of food printing is still
relatively new and has not yet gained
mainstream popularity in the way that
3D printers have.
However, attempts are being made to
explore what kinds of food can be
printed and how to utilise 3D printing to

Figure 41: Activity treats comes in four forms:
Graph, Slogan, Flower and an Emoji.

Page 70 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Implementation of the EdiPulse system
EdiPulse uses a Polar heart rate monitor and its
accompanying mobile app, “Polar Beat" to record
heart rate data. The EdiPulse application (written
in JavaScript) downloads heart rate data from the
Polar web site and then parses this XML data to
identify heart rate zones within the recorded
data. The application takes an average of every
10 minutes of recorded heart rate data. If this
value is above 65% percent of the maximum
heart rate, the application considers those 10
minutes as active time, in accordance with The
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM
2013) guidelines. The system then uses this
information to algorithmically construct all four
activity treats using OpenJSCAD12 software as
follows. Figure 42 describes the activity treats in
detail.
Figure 42: The four activity treats.

Graph: Graph shows recorded heart rate values over time. I first
map the recorded heartbeat per minute to a point in XY space
and I then extrude the resultant 2D shape along the z-axis to
TIME SPENT
EXERCISING

achieve a suitable thickness.
Flower: Flower provides a summary of physical activity across
each hour of recording. Each petal of the flower corresponds to

1

an hour and its length denotes the amount of physical activity
in that particular hour. I chose not to add a starting point, as I
wanted the Flower to be ambiguous, allowing participants to

2

day into the EdiPulse application. This goal is a chosen

Straight face Emoji

of the set activity
goal

3

self-driven activity goal through an emoticon face. At the start
of the day, users can enter their physical activity goal for the

Sad Emoji

set activity goal
Between 50 to 99%

reflect and identify the starting hour on their own.
Emoji: Emoji communicates an individual’s progress towards a

Less than 50% of the

RECEIVED EMOJI

4

Equals the set

Happy Emoji

activity goal
Greater than the set

Super Happy Emoji

activity goal

duration for doing moderate to high level of physical activity
and it could span over the day. The Emoji bears one of four
faces: sad face, straight face, happy face and super happy face
based on how close one gets to the set goal. For example,
achieving and exceeding the goal respectively results in a
happy and super happy Emoji, while failing to meet the goal

Table 3: Emoji communicates an individual’s progress towards a
self-driven activity goal through different emotions
I next describe rationales behind my design decisions.

results in a sad or straight face Emoji as shown in Table 3.

Mapping physical activity data to chocolate

Slogan: Slogan makes a cheerful comment based on the

In line with the previous two case studies, I chose to record an

amount of physical activity done by the user in a day. For
example, if the user has been inactive during the day, then the
Slogan will contain motivating words and will communicate
the benefits of an active lifestyle as shown in Figure 43. On the
other hand, if the user has been active, then the Slogan will be
more gratifying, an example can be seen in Figure 43.a and
43.b.
12

http://openjscad.org

entire day’s worth of data and not just the time spent
performing a physical activity so that I can present an overall
picture of one’s physical activity throughout the study period. I
also decided not to map the exact amount of calories burnt
during an exercise to the amount of printed chocolate (Khot et
al. 2015), because a high amount of chocolate could reverse
the benefit of performing some form of physical activity.

Page 71 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Baking paper allowed for the easy removal of
the cooled chocolate. For thinner prints, I
used a 20 ml syringe with an external
removable needle tip (opening: 30mm).

Equipment & the printing process
For the prototype, I used a ChocEdge V1 3D
printer13 to print the activity treats. During
the exploration, I found that chocolate, as a
print material, requires care and attention
concerning the correct temperature setting.
For a good quality print, the temperature of
the tempered chocolate and outside room
should be in the range of 25-32 degree
Celsius (Leffer 2016). Extensive tempering of
the chocolate results in watery prints, similar
Figure 43: Participant receive a different ‘Slogan’
based on their level of physical activity in a day.

to the one in Figure 43.c. Cold weather also
creates issues as it hardens the chocolate within the syringe,
which either results in no prints or can even damage the

Instead, I focused on making the representations more
beautiful and gratifying with an increase in the amount of
physical activity performed. For instance, with Slogan my
emphasis is on the content rather than its length. To this end, I
see and utilise chocolate only as a positive enforcement
technique for physical activity. Moreover, owing to its
cardiovascular health benefits (Steinberg et al. 2003), I have
used dark chocolate for printing and kept its quantity to a
maximum of 20 grams a day.

Representation choices

extruder motor. Additionally, air bubbles in the syringe also
affect the quality of the print. This was a crucial problem
because my study participants had no prior experience with 3D
printing. I therefore explored different ways to simplify the
printing process by keeping the chocolate consistent and warm
during printing. For instance, I tried attaching custom fans and
cold plates to the printer so that the chocolate hardens quickly
after printing. However, printing with these alterations did not
give consistent results. As a remedy, I gave participants a food
thermometer for the accurate tempering of chocolate and
asked them to keep the room temperature in the range of 25

The design of the activity treats evolved iteratively due to both

to 32 degree Celsius during printing. Figure 44 provides the

discussions and printing trials. I started by reading prior

four-step process that was provided to the participants.

literature (Stusak et al. 2014; Consolvo et al. 2007) and taking
into account lessons learned from case study 1 and
2 to identify potential representations that
effectively reflect someone’s physical activity. I also
took into account the technical capabilities of
current food printing technologies, which, for
example, cannot print tall structures easily. As a
result, I had to restrict the design explorations to
rather flat models. I also considered the printing
time, amount of chocolate and size of the print bed
(20 x 24cm) for print efficiency in terms of time and
space. Additionally, I tried printing chocolate onto
different food materials such as bread and biscuits
but the printing results were inconsistent in
quality. Hence, I used a flat acrylic sheet with a
baking paper as a print surface (Refer Figure 44,
step 3).
13

http://chocedge.com

Figure 44: Chocolate printing process.

Page 72 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Concealing digital display and ad-hoc printing method
I used Printrun14 , an open source program to drive the printing.
Under normal settings, this program displays a 3D replica of
the object currently being printed on the screen. However, I
altered the program settings to conceal the digital display of
the activity treats. My intention was to keep the treats as a
surprise so that they are revealed only during the actual
printing. Furthermore, I also orchestrated the printing to keep
users engaged in the printing process. For example, Slogan is
printed in an ad-hoc manner, where letters from different
words (within a Slogan) are printed randomly. To elaborate, if
the Slogan was ‘Just do it’ then it would be printed
progressively as:
1. ‘_ _ _t _o i_’
2. ‘_ _st do i_’
3. ‘_ust do it’
4. ‘just do it’.

EdiPulse in action (field study)

Figure 45: Participants’ details along with their
activity goal for the day.

Study setup and procedure
I provided each participant with the following supplies: 1) a

I conducted an exploratory “in the wild” study to understand

Polar H7 heart rate monitor and an iPod touch to record heart

the user experience with the EdiPulse system in an everyday

rate data; 2) ChocEdge printer 3) MacBook Air that contains the

context, and the role of activity treats in supporting physical

PrintRun program; 4) Chocolate tempering machine and a food

activity goals. The study took place in seven households across

thermometer; 5) Printing material: 20 syringes, 20 needle tips,

Melbourne, Australia for a period of two weeks where thirteen

five dark chocolate bars of 200g each, tissue paper, and pre-cut

participants interacted with the system on a daily basis. Figure

baking paper, 6) instructional manual on study steps. Figure 46

45 provides the demographic details of the participants along

displays the study setup at one participant’s household.

with their physical activity goals for each day of the study. In
total, there were thirteen participants (names changed): 2
couples in their early thirties (Harry & Fiona and Rohan &
Diya), 1 couple in their mid forties (Josh & Karen), 2 couples in

On the first day, I explained the study procedure with a
demonstration of how to use the system. I asked the
participants to perform the following tasks every day:

their mid-twenties (Adam & Helena and Gavin & Daisy), two

Morning Tasks: Participants put on the heart rate monitor and

housemates (Jayden & Samantha) in mid twenties and one

started recording data using the Polar Beat app, installed on

participant in their early fifties (Frank). Frank’s roommate Kelly

the iPod Touch. Once the recording started, participants

also wanted to participate but she dropped out of the study

continued their day as usual while carrying the iPod with them.

because of personal reasons. The sample size and study period
are in accordance with earlier field studies (Brown et al. 2011;
Lee et al. 2015; Stusak et al. 2014). Ten participants had
previous experience with self-monitoring devices and nine
participants that include all female participants had a sweet
tooth for chocolate. The recruitment was open and followed a
snowballing method. There was no financial compensation for
participation. However, as I only had access to one working
chocolate printer, longer deployments of EdiPulse were limited.
Overall, the deployments took more than four months where I
proceeded with a sequential order of installing the EdiPulse
system at different households.

14

http://pronterface.com

Evening Tasks: Participants stopped the recording around 6pm.
Their heart rate data then got automatically synced to the
Polar website. I downloaded the data from the website and
prepared the 3D models of activity treats using the EdiPulse
application. I then emailed the 3D models as a single print file
(.gcode) to the participants. I kept the task of 3D modelling
myself in order to reduce participants’ workload and to keep
the activity treats as a surprise. After receiving the files,
participants followed the steps outlined in Figure 44 to print
their treats. The preparation took around 15 minutes while the
printing took an average 13 minutes.

Page 73 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

During the study, I maintained contact
with all study participants via email and
via the phone, to provide technical support
whenever needed.

Findings
All participants welcomed the system with
curiosity and placed it in their respective
kitchens as shown in Figure 47 Five
households preferred to print and eat the
chocolate after dinner, usually around 9
pm, as a desert, while 2 households did
their printing the following morning.
Participants from each household printed
their activity treats each day, one after the
other. Interestingly, participants not only
showed keen interest in printing their own
activity treats, but they were very much
interested to see how the activity treats of
their housemate’s (partner) was getting
printed.
I reflect on the findings across four
categories in total: overall experience with the EdiPulse
Figure 46: Study setup at Harry’s house.

system, use of chocolate as a representation material, appeal
of the four representations of activity treats, and feedback on

Data source and analysis
The data collection started after I installed the EdiPulse system

the printing process.

Reflections on EdiPulse system as a whole

at the participant’s household. I visited each household on the

I start by narrating how the EdiPulse system helped

first and last day of the study and spent around 4 hours in total

participants in supporting their physical activity goals.

with participants from the same household. The main source
of data from the study was the post-study interviews. These
interviews were conducted at the participant’s
home on the last day of study. Each interview
lasted around 45 minutes and the participants
were interviewed individually. During the poststudy interview, participants described their
experiences of using the EdiPulse system and
their reactions to seeing their physical activity
data appear in an edible form. The interviews
addressed the motivations, expectations, utility
and experiences of the EdiPulse system in
relation to their personal set of physical activity
goals. I also made use of photos and videos that
participants captured voluntarily during the
course of study as evidence of engagement to
further support the interviews. All the interviews
were audio-recorded to support further analysis
after the interviews were complete.

Figure 47: EdiPulse occupied the kitchen
space in most houses.

Page 74 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

PARTICIPANT

SUPER HAPPY EMOJI

HAPPY EMOJI

STRAIGHT FACE EMOJI

SAD EMOJI

1

Harry

12

2

0

0

2

Fiono

9

3

2

0

3

Josh

6

4

2

2

4

Karen

2

6

3

3

5

Adam

2

5

4

3

6

Helena

10

2

1

1

7

Rohan

6

4

2

2

8

Diya

5

5

2

2

9

Gavin

7

5

1

1

10

Daisy

6

5

2

1

11

Jayden

6

3

3

2

12

Sarah

6

3

2

3

13

Frank

12

1

1

0

Table 4: Participants received happy and super happy ‘Emoji’ 74% of the time by
achieving their set physical activity goals.

EdiPulse facilitated reflection on physical activities

Delayed feedback encouraged being active throughout the

Participants used the EdiPulse system to understand their daily

day

routines. For most participants, the study was an “eye-opener”

The printing schedule was designed to deliver the activity

of their level of physical fitness. Rohan reflected: “It was a clash

treats at the end of the day. Participants appreciated such a

of realities, let me put it in this way, when I saw a sad Emoji, I felt,

delayed but fixed time of feedback to print their activity treats.

God dammit, is this me? I have to do more exercise.” Adam

Rohan said, “I really wait for the evenings these days. The first

similarly was sad to realise the kind of sedentary life he is

thing I want to do after I am back from the office is to print my

living now. He said with a sigh, “When I was younger I had a very

treats. I want to see if I have done sufficient exercise to get a

active lifestyle, these days I am more sedentary in comparison. I

smiling Emoji, or to get a long petal Flower.” Diya mentioned that

need to kick off my activities a bit more.” Harry, on the other

the hidden aspect of the EdiPulse reward kept her active

hand, took Emoji as his inspiration and tried to remain

throughout the day, “I did not know whether I have achieved my

consistently active during the study period. As a result, he

goals for the day or not. I used to calculate how much should I

received a super happy Emoji almost on all days of the study

walk to get a smiling and a really boosting message. The other

(refer Table 4), which made him feel good about himself. He

day, I anticipated getting a smiling ‘Emoji’ but I was really happy

said with a smile: “I thought I live a pretty lazy life but the Emoji

to see the super smiling Emoji, and the fully-grown Flower. That

inspired me to do some physical workout each day. That felt good.”

day I walked twice every time to get my coffee, that should have

When participants fell short of their desired goal, the EdiPulse

exceeded my goal [laughing].”

system delivered a Slogan such as “the gym is waiting for you”,

EdiPulse served as a visual reminder to do physical activity

“Tomorrow is a great day to work out” and “Do not forget your
morning exercise” All participants liked such encouragements
and reminders and often did more exercise the next day as a
result. Daisy said, “The EdiPulse system really helped me to create
a routine. Now I regularly go to the gym. I think I badly needed
that kind of push. I am really happy that I got the kick now”.
Helena and Frank had similar thoughts as Daisy. Josh changed
his everyday routine by reflecting on the activity treats: “Now, I
walk more during the day. When I go to lunch I try to take stairs.”

Participants felt that the presence of the system in their
household worked as a constant reminder to remain active.
Sarah said: “It is not easy to turn away from it if it is sitting on the
kitchen bench printing delicious chocolate and reminding you to
do exercise. A mobile app can be a bit of a fad - you use it for a
while and then you don’t.”

Page 75 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Diya similarly said, “I feel like I am answerable to this machine.

Sarah had similar thoughts: “You normally think you should not

Even when I am outside, I kind of hear the printing sound and

have chocolate if you are doing exercise, but getting a moderate

smell of chocolate that reminds me of my activity goal.”

amount of chocolate was kind of good that it broke the barrier.”

The edible component of the feedback was appreciated

Chocolate was considered to be a deserved reward

For Harry, the edible aspect of the system was the standout

Chocolate felt like a win-win situation for nine participants, as

component. He recalled his previous experience with a cycling

it became a prize for being active. Fiona saw the chocolate as a

app: “I used to track my cycling using an app. After the cycling was

celebratory reward for her efforts: “Food is an important part of

over I used to check the distance and speed. But my interaction

the celebration. We often reward ourselves by going to restaurants

with the app stopped there, it did not go any further. Now with

to celebrate, and what can be better than a chocolate to cherish

EdiPulse, I got a chocolate printed 'Emoji', totally different than the

my 40 minutes run!” Interestingly, their eating behaviour was

numbers and much pleasing to the heart.” Daisy added, “It’s

influenced by the content of the treats. For example, five

unbelievable that EdiPulse not only tells you how much exercise

participants did not eat chocolate on days when they received

you have done through different shapes, but you get to eat those

the sad face Emoji. Instead, they ate the chocolate only on days

shapes too”. Josh concluded by saying: “I like the way it uses the

when they received happy or super happy Emoji to celebrate

chocolate instead of digital screens to display data. In that way, it

their success. Diya said, “It was challenging at first not to eat the

takes you away from the screens, where you spend most of your

chocolate, but I was determined to achieve my goal on the next

time due to work anyway”.

day, which I did.”

EdiPulse was dearly missed

A moderate amount of the chocolate was appreciated

I met Gavin 10 days after the end of the study. He told me how

All participants appreciated receiving the same amount of

much he misses the system “I was so habitual to the system that

chocolate every day irrespective of how active they were on

gave me sweet rewards for my exercise - now I miss all that. There

each day. Helena commented: “Having an edible reward is good,

is no reward waiting for me in the evenings now. The other day I

but you can really get cheeky with it like you burned 2000 calories

had a very active day and I was really missing my sweet treats.

and here is 2000 calories in return. But I like that the system is

Thankfully there was a little chocolate left from the study, so I

not tailored in that way.” Jayden similarly said: “I kind of liked

created some treats for myself and Fiona.” (Refer to Figure 28).

that it gave me a small reward or energy for the next day’s

Reflections on chocolate as the representation material
All participants appreciated the edible aspect of the system,

exercise. It was not a lot but just enough to put a smile on my face
and to keep me motivated to exercise.”

facilitated by the use of chocolate and described it as a core
contributor to their overall positive experience.

Chocolate was at first considered counterproductive
Six participants initially felt that
representing physical activity data in
chocolate can be counterproductive
but as they used the system on a daily
basis, they were surprised to see the
positivity and fun that it brought to
their exercise. Gavin reflected in the
interview how his perception towards
chocolate changed over the course of
the study. He mentioned, “To be honest, I
was initially skeptical over the chocolate,
but now I realise that how exercise
becomes more fun with chocolate and a
little bit of chocolate does not harm
anyone”.

Figure 28: Gavin manually created activity treats to reward himself,
mimicking the EdiPulse system.

Page 76 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Thinner forms of chocolate supported guilt free eating

Karen similarly reflected her affection towards the Emoji by

Three participants found eating activity treats quite different

saying: “Receiving a smiling ‘Emoji’ feels like someone liking your

to eating a solid block of chocolate because of the thin size
(2mm in height). Interestingly, four participants felt that eating
this way was more fun because it diminished their guilt of
eating chocolate. Daisy said: “It is this arrangement and also the
quantity of chocolate, so when you are eating it, you feel the
flavour but you do not feel that you are eating a lot of chocolate,
not in the way that will make you guilty or something.” (refer
Figure 49).

photo on Instagram. It’s a nice encouraging thing for the day and I
think we kind of rely on such encouragements a lot more these
days.” Besides the “feel-good” factor, nine participants found
the Emoji was a motivational anchor to achieve their desired
goals. Gavin emphasised: “For me the Emoji was the strongest
motivator, others were nice too but for me the Emoji’ was
sufficient.” All participants also wanted to avoid getting a sad
face ‘Emoji’ at the end of the day. In consequence, they tried to
be more active. For example, Diya received a
straight face Emoji for two subsequent days,
which was disappointing for her. She said,
“Through the study I learned that you have to go
an extra mile to get a happy smiling Emoji.”

Activity treats drove healthy competition
Ten participants felt that the system
encouraged healthy competition between
couples. Gavin and Daisy competed with each
other in terms of who would get a super happy
Emoji. Daisy reflected, “On one of the study days,
I did not exercise but Gavin did a lot. So I got a
Figure 49: Thinner forms of chocolate were fun to eat.

sad ‘Emoji’ and he got a super happy one. The
next day I was so motivated to do exercise and to also get a
super happy 'Emoji'.” Helena mentioned: “I loved when Adam

Chocolate treats moderated cravings for something sweet

got the printed ‘Slogan’ as ‘Helena is getting all the happy 'Emoji’. I

All female study participants were fond of chocolate, but

liked how it reflects my competence”. Her partner, Adam, who was

EdiPulse helped them in controlling their temptation for

less active than Helena took this fact sportingly and manually

chocolate. Diya said: “Although chocolate was so accessible, you

wrote the following message on top of Helena’s Slogan: “Adam

also knew that every night you would have a bite of chocolate.

is getting all the chocolate” (Refer to Figure 50).

And when I did not exercise, I knew from the system that my body
did not ask me to eat more chocolate. So it really made me eat
less chocolate than what I normally do.”

Activity treats were rarely shared
Eleven participants ate their activity treats and never
shared them with others. Helena said: “It is a personal
reward for what I have done. I would not give it to others
since I did all the hard work. I know, it sounds really bad
but I kept these treats to myself.” Jayden similarly
commented, “Food is generally shared, but once it has
data elements to it, it becomes more personal.”

Reflections on representations of activity treats
Next, I describe how each of the four representations
appealed to the participants.

Emoji was the favourite activity treat
The Emoji was the favourite activity treat for all
participants. Helena was happy that “When I see a happy
'Emoji' face, I feel that I did a good job.”

Figure 50: Adam altered Helena’s message to show competence

Page 77 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Slogan made activity treats serendipitous

and said “When I do exercise, I feel like the sun is smiling at me

After the Emoji, participants enjoyed the Slogan mainly for the

and sending me blessings through longer rays (as represented by

suspense that it carried during printing and the motivational

the long petals of Flower).”

push that it offered. Karen liked the way the system prints

Reflections on the chocolate printing process

Slogan, “I enjoyed the writing, getting a new motivational ‘Slogan’
every day meant a lot to me.”
Josh added: “We kind of knew whether we will get a happy 'Emoji'
or what will be the shape of the ‘Graph’ at the end of the day, but
Slogan always offered something new.” Participants considered
guessing the Slogan as a challenging and exciting activity.
Frank mentioned, “I continue on watching the Slogan getting
printed. It’s funny that I am always wrong in guessing it. The
system keeps on adding alphabets [letters], and like a small child,

Participants from the same household did printing together
and showed a keen interest in each other’s activity treats.

Printing offered slow reflection on data
Participants particularly enjoyed standing next to the printer
and guessing, “what the printer is telling tonight”, as explained
by Frank (refer Figure 51). Josh added: “Because of the nature of
the machine, you keep watching it doing the print. It is a much
nicer process to see how it reveals my data as opposed to directly

I keep on guessing it [laughing].”

knowing what it is going to say.”

Positive and personalised Slogans were appreciated

Karen, Harry, and Frank voluntarily took a lot of photographs of

Most participants found that the Slogan had more appeal
when it was positively framed and had a close relation with
their life events. Josh mentioned one story where he received
the message ‘How about jogging together tomorrow?’ He said,
“Yes, I would love to jog with Karen but the system did not know

the printing process. For them, the combined experience of
watching the print and taking photographs was nothing short
of a thrill. Karen said with a smile, “Taking photographs of the
print raised my heart rate and in that way I am burning more
calories, I wished I had the monitor on”.

that tomorrow I have heaps of meetings, so I can’t.” For Frank, the

The sound and smell of the printing process was pleasant

positive framing of the Slogan created more emotional

Eleven participants appreciated the mechanical qualities of

connection with the EdiPulse system. He said, “The messages

the printer. They found the printing sound quite pleasant,

were like icing on top of the cake. Most of the messages reflected

especially during the printing of circular shapes like an ‘Emoji’.

well on my daily routine. I felt as if EdiPulse was a human who

Besides the sound, they also enjoyed the sweet smell of the

was handpicking and crafting the messages based on my data -

warm chocolate during the printing process. Frank, who

just the way I needed.”

sometimes did the printing during the morning, said, “My

The Graph was informative but familiar

roommate Kelly commented that it was the first time ever she

The Graph did not receive the same appeal as other treats.
Rohan and Gavin found it familiar to what they usually see on
a screen. However, for Adam and Daisy, the Graph was essential
to identify and reflect on their activities. Daisy summed this up
by saying: “I like how it really shows the ups and downs. It is
really expressive. You look at it and you can recollect what
happened during the day. I really liked that.” Graph was
particularly appreciated when there were visible highs
and lows in the heart rate due to the different amount of
physical activity. When the Graph had nearly linear
patterns it had little appeal amongst participants.

The Flower raised awareness of sedentary hours
Frank, Daisy, Gavin and Rohan found the Flower
informative as it offered a more reflective picture of their
lifestyle, particularly highlighting their sedentary hours.
Gavin and Daisy were particularly unaware about the
amount of time they spent sitting each day and the
Flower effectively communicated this information. Frank
was happy to see his exercise schedule being reflected in
the Flower. He compared the Flower petals with sun rays

woke up with the smell of chocolate, which she liked a lot. It gave
both of us the motivation to start an active day with a smile”.
Figure 51: Participants loved watching the slow reveal
of their data from the day

Page 78 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Figure 52: EdiPulse resulted in healthy competition to
get a bigger smile as a reward at the end of the day

Printing activity treats together was fun

the idea of getting chocolate every day, she said, “I think I

All participants enjoyed preparing activity treats together

would like to receive chocolate treats when I have been really

(Refer Figure 52). Rohan compared printing activity treats with
cooking and enjoyed doing it together with Diya. He said: “It
was like cooking but with more fun because we also get to talk
about what treats we will get and then compare our treats.”

active for continuously one week or so. Getting chocolate treats
every day may spoil me. I am not a good girl every time, and I can
eat chocolate treats even when I was not active. I would love to
get other healthy but tasty food on days when I am not active, so

Guessing the Slogan together was one of the favourite

that I am punished in a good way.”

activities of the participants. Harry recalled the involved

Concern over wasted chocolate

complexities in guessing the Slogan “Take yesterday for
example, when I started printing, it initially printed the letter ‘t’,
then ‘a’ and then ‘e’, so we thought the word is ‘eat’ and the
message is something about food. But then slowly it added
two more letters before ‘eat’, it suddenly became ‘sweat’, so our

Participants never wanted to share their activity treats, sharing
happened only under the concern of wasting chocolate. All
participants did not want to waste chocolate, and therefore
came up with different strategies to save chocolate.

guess was wrong and we had to start from scratch, but it was

Samantha created chocolate bunnies from the left over

fun”. The printed Slogan was: ‘Sweat is fat crying’. Rohan felt

chocolate, “I love chocolate, and I can not see someone wasting it.

that doing the study together with Diya strengthened their

It’s not only that it is chocolate, you wouldn’t really want to waste

relationship, “It would not have been fun if I could not compare

any food. Right! So I created these chocolate teddies and bunnies

our values and it would not have strengthened the bond to go

from the remaining chocolate, and I can eat them later on. But the

together to the gym.”

problem is that I do not know how much chocolate each bunny is

Issues with EdiPulse system

made up of, will it suit my activity level or not? I will probably gift
these bunnies to my friends.” At Karen and Josh’s home their son

Participants also highlighted certain issues with the EdiPulse

mostly ate activity treats from Josh’s data. Josh explained the

system that I discuss below.

reason: “I suppose, I am concerned over the wastage of the

Diversity in food materials was desired
Fiona and Daisy sympathised over the lack of food diversity
that EdiPulse offered. Fiona pointed out: “We eat a variety of

remains of chocolate in the syringes, plastics, and the paper, but
it’s good that the chocolate is never wasted. Even if I do not eat it,
my son would eat it.”

food on a daily basis. This is a particular device that prints only

Printing was sometimes messy

chocolate. But I am sure in 10-20 years, I could see everything 3D

Print results were not always consistent. There were instances

printed.” Helena and Josh, on the other hand, wished to print

when participants over-tempered the chocolate or left air

healthier foods such as carrots. They appreciated the chocolate

bubbles in the syringe (see Figure 53). As a result, the treats

treats, but having the chocolate treats daily did not seem an

did not print as expected, which annoyed most of the

appealing idea to two of them. Diya was slightly nervous about

participants. Karen complained: “It was quite disappointing to

Page 79 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

see the prints becoming messy. If EdiPulse does not print it

achieve their goals most of the time. Participants appreciated

correctly, you feel like you haven’t done the task properly.”

receiving an edible reward every day irrespective of their

Interestingly, most participants did another round of printing

performance and applauded that the system did not punish

to get satisfactory and good looking treats. Diya said: “I don’t

them if they failed to achieve their goals. The quantity of

know why but getting perfectly printed activity treats made me

chocolate was just right to enjoy the flavour of the chocolate

happy. There were a couple of times when I received messy prints

without feeling guilty of eating chocolate or consuming more

on days when I was not active. That time, I felt like the system is

calories after their workout. Moreover, getting chocolate as a

angry on me and therefore, punishing me with bad prints. But I

reward also helped participants in managing their cravings for

printed them again so that I can eat them on other active days.”

sweets. To this end, the primary reward was the edible aspect

Tempering chocolate and the print setup were considered
laborious

of the representations. Being edible encouraged participants
to reflect on their personal data, as well as their lifestyle, in a
playful way. Further studies, however, are required to

All participants found the preparation steps time consuming.

understand reasons behind participants’ interest in receiving a

Fiona mentioned: “Loading the syringe and setting up the printer

reward in edible materials like chocolate, compared to

was kind of labour work that one should do to get their activity

healthier materials.

treats.” Helena echoed similar concerns: “The preparation needs
to be faster and easier.” Harry pointed out that besides being
time-consuming the process sometimes also caused a mess.
He said, “Many times when I tempered the chocolate, I got
chocolate all over my fingers, which by the way was not a bad
thing (laughing).”

The EdiPulse system served a dual function, a joint pursuit for
hedonic (pleasurable) and eudaemonic (meaningful)
experiences. EdiPulse allowed participants to consider their
self-driven activity goals, whilst also keeping them motivated
to lead an active life. Earlier studies have shown that
individuals approach self-monitoring
techniques in a pursuit of virtue, i.e. to
identify and develop character
strengths in relation to certain
fitness-related goals (Li et al. 2011;
Lupton 2016). Psychologists describe
such activities as eudaemonic
pursuits (Huta 2013; Henderson et al.
2013). In this regard, self-monitoring
technologies help individuals by
monitoring their performance and
progress towards fitness related goals.
However, earlier studies also highlight
that self-knowledge alone may not be
sufficient to inspire users towards
achieving their fitness goals (Lazar et

Figure 53: Participants did not like bad prints, they
often did another round of print to get the perfect
deserving treats

Discussions

al. 2015; Klasnja et al. 2011). As a
result, many people struggle to maintain focus and consistency
with their physical activity routines. To keep people motivated,
designers may need to paint physical activity experience with
a ‘hedonistic gloss’. The importance of pleasurable rewards is
also iterated in earlier works (Henderson et al. 2013;

Based on the study insights, I put forward key aspects of food-

Hassenzahl et al. 2013) that highlight revitalisation functions

based representation that designers should consider to design

of rewards in encouraging people to pursue their goals. Food is

systems for physical activity.

one of the fundamental pleasures that we interact with every

Utilise appealing materials to make physical activity
goals pleasurable

day (Cabanac 2009; Lupton 1998). I, therefore, suggest creating
pleasurable rewards by using appealing materials, believing
that doing so can improve individual’s relationship with

The study reveals that the use of chocolate as a deserving

understanding physical activity, and will help to encourage and

reward for the physical activity efforts helped participants to

motivate people in achieving their goals.

Page 80 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Make the first sight of activity treats appealing to

unknowingly did more exercise and as a result got a super

support positive feedback

happy Emoji. As such, the fixed patterns of seeing the data at

The study highlighted that the visual aspect of activity treats
was very crucial. I found that participants wanted to get

the end of the day might have helped participants in building
a health routine.

appealing and perfectly printed activity treats. To achieve this

The above-mentioned findings highlight the peculiarities of

result, participants were happy to repeat multiple prints in

our interactions with food. Our interactions with food are very

instances where the initial print was not as good as expected.

different from our interactions with screens and other non-

One participant even considered the bad prints as a form of

edible physical artefacts. For example, digital screens are used

punishment for being sedentary. Additionally, seeing the

frequently and for a long time, but the data consumed from

Slogan printed triggered the game of guessing, which every

them is brief and forgotten once the task is over (task-based),

participant mentioned as a fun activity that they followed

i.e. you’ve read the news article, or finished the paper writing,

almost every day. Furthermore, the Emoji and Flower

or watched the TV show. – Artefacts at home are always on the

representations helped participants to view a summary of their

shelf, but you have brief interactions with them, but often and

active self. This is in line with recent study findings where

over many years – looking at a photograph, a medal, etc. So

participants voiced interest for a representation like a report

you see briefly, but get nice memories and then a few months

card, which summarises their exercises in terms of good or bad

later you do the same thing for the same effect, etc. Food, in

(instead of giving raw data) (Lazar et al. 2015).

comparison, inhibits a scheduled pattern of interaction. For

Another interesting finding was that getting a sad face Emoji
or a short petal Flower did not discourage the participants –
rather, it served as an aspirational goal to do more exercise.
This finding contrasts with previous studies that highlight the
human tendency to avoid negative data (Lin et al. 2006). For
instance, in the Fish’n’Steps study (ibid), participants did not
look at the fish-based representation of their data when they
were inactive because they knew their sedentary activity would

example, most cultures eat food three times a day. Moreover,
once satiety is reached, food is no longer consumed. Taking
this into consideration, food makes a good case for scheduling
interactions and feedback on self-monitored data in fixed
intervals, for example, around meal times. Structuring
interactions in such a way also means that feedback on data is
not immediately available, rather it is delayed to a certain time
of the day.

make the fish sad. The findings suggest that participants were

This will further add a feeling of anticipation to look at the

very much interested in seeing and reflecting upon the data,

feedback. I, therefore, encourage designers to consider offering

possibly because of the involvement of chocolate.

activity treats to the user in fixed intervals.

Chocolate or any other food is difficult to ignore (Dumas 1958).

Harness the characteristics of food and the printer to

The visual appeal of the activity treats should, therefore, be

make the process an engaging one

appealing for both active and sedentary days, because the
sight of beautifully presented food always has greater appeal
(Dumas 1958; Delwiche 2012). Designers should also consider
an incremental approach to printing activity treats where each
layer positively adds to the feedback being printed.

The EdiPulse system involved users in the preparation and
printing of the activity treats. All participants enjoyed the
printing sound of the printer. The sight and smell of the
chocolate being slowly overlaid on the print bed further added
to the sensorial experience of watching the entire process.

Schedule the consumption of activity treats to develop

Additionally, the randomness of guessing the different parts of

an exercise routine

Slogan while it is being printed, added fun and intrigue to the

In the study, participants appreciated getting delayed feedback
on their daily activity in the form of activity treats that were to
be printed at the end of the day. Getting feedback in such a
manner kept participants away from screens and the
continuous streaming of heart rate data being captured by the
heart rate monitor. Additionally, having to wait for their
chocolate representations moderated their cravings for
chocolate and gave them anticipatory reasons to look forward
to their activity treats. Participants wanted to get a positive

overall experience. Watching the print process also gave
participants time to reflect on their exercise achievements for
that day. Although the preparation in terms of getting the
chocolate ready for printing was felt to be laborious at times
and considered an annoyance. Participants’ interest in activity
treats, however, was sustained throughout the study, because
participants felt that the benefits like the excitement of seeing
their data in an edible form was bigger than the "duties" they
had to perform.

Slogan and a super happy Emoji every day by completing their

These findings speak to the earlier works that highlight the

set activity goals. Since there was uncertainty in accurately

importance of slow reflection (Grosse-Hering et al. 2013;

predicting whether they have done enough activity, they

Hallnas and Redstorm 2001; Odom et al. 2009) that

Page 81 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

emphasises the need for thinking about reflection and

As such, my work also opens up opportunities to design future

contemplation in opposition to efficiency and performance

systems that aim to support the human energy cycle through

while designing technology for everyday use. Interestingly,

the amalgamation of food and technology design. I encourage

recovering and gaining personal health is also a slow and

design researchers to explore the potential of food printing

steady process, which demands time and consistency in terms

beyond creating beautiful looking 3D printed food to create

efforts from the user (Weinberg and Gould 2006). For example,

meaningful experiences for everyday practices.

the result of burning body fats through an exercise is visible
only after the user has followed many exercises regularly and
for a sufficient amount of time. Therefore, I believe that there
is an opportunity to support the slow and steady nature of
improving health by creating tools that support slow and
steady reflection.
I draw designers’ attention to four factors that influenced the
interest in the printing process: 1) printer sound, 2) choice of
representations, 3) surprise element due to the ad-hoc printing
of letters, and 4) the pleasant smell of chocolate. As such, I
encourage designers to accommodate both printer and food
characteristics in their design e.g., choosing foods that
produce pleasant aromas during printing. Additionally, to
reduce the preparation time, I suggest using pre-filled syringes
and a heated platform to keep the food warm for printing.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I presented EdiPulse system that transforms
heart rate data of an individual into 3D printed chocolate.
EdiPulse provided four activity treats: Graph, Flower, Emoji and
Slogan as rewards for being physically active. I conducted an in
the wild field deployment to understand the influence of
EdiPulse on one’s physical activity experience. The study
insights illustrated that activity treats can positively influence
an individual’s behaviour and attitude towards physical
activity. Participants enjoyed getting chocolate treats on active
days, whereas on sedentary days, they preserved the activity
treats for later consumption. The quality of the printed activity
treats was crucial since participants wanted to eat “good
looking” chocolate. As such, the EdiPulse system encouraged
healthy competition between participants from the same
household, and motivated participants to develop a persistent
routine for exercise.
The reflections presented in the chapter were based on the
repeated interactions with the system for 14 consecutive days
with each day involving data monitoring of 7 hours and
chocolate printing of 25 minutes. Participants expressed
missing the system after the study was over, further suggests
that their interest in EdiPulse could have persisted if the study
ran for longer. I believe that the gathered understanding of the
relationship between food printing and self-monitoring
technologies will provide alternate perspectives that would
complement current task or data-driven approaches to
designing self-monitoring technologies within HCI.

Page 82 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#7
Shelfie

Page 83 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CHAPTER 7

Shelfie
This chapter describes Shelfie, a design framework that presents 16 design themes for designing material
representations of physical activity.

Introduction
In this chapter, I present a conceptual design framework Shelfie that aims to guide future
explorations in the domain of material representations of physical activity. Shelfie offers
16 design themes that are represented in the form of design cards. Each theme
highlights an important aspect of the design of material representation. Through this
“Attention to the qualities of things

framework, I intend to make the knowledge, gained in different phases of my

resurrects the old idea of notitia as a

candidature, accessible to interaction designers who wish to take the field of material

primary activity of the soul. Notitia

representation forward.

refers to that capacity to form true
notions of thing from attentive
noticing."
— James Hillmand

This framework is valuable because despite the recent emerging interest in creating a
physical manifestation of personal data (Lee et al. 2015; Nissen et al. 2015; Vermeulen
et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2016), there is only a limited understanding of how to design such
material representations. With Shelfie, I aim to fill this gap in knowledge by providing a
conceptual understanding of designing for the vital aspects of the material
representations of physical activity data. This understanding was accumulated over
three years through designing, studying and analysing three different systems
(described in chapter 4, 5, and 6) that explore different types of material representations.
To this end, this framework also provides a foundation for investigating the meaning and
relational effects of material representations for people and also for the representations’
context of use. It also provides an analytic lens with which designers can look at digital
fabrication as a design resource for materialising personal data.
I start this chapter by discussing the existing frameworks designed to support material
representations in different contexts.

Related Work
In the past, various frameworks have been developed to establish an understanding of
material (both physical and digital) within interaction design. For example, Jung and
Stolterman (2011) proposed “form driven interaction design research” that highlights
form and materiality aspects of digital artefacts. Wiberg (2014) articulated four
dimensions of material-centred interaction design that include: materials, details,
texture and wholeness. Ashby and Johnson (2010) help product designers in selecting
the right material by proposing the following five dimensions of material information:
engineering, usability, environment, aesthetics, and personality. Giaccardi and Karana
(2015) proposed a framework on material experience that highlights how interactions
with material influence our practises around four dimensions: sensorial, interpretive,
affective, and performative levels. Similarly, Doring (2016) constructed “the interaction
material profile” to support a structural analysis of our interactions with materials and to
help build a catalogue of interaction materials.

Page 84 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Fuchsberger et al. (2015) offered an artefact oriented

of their project. Next I discuss the initial version of Shelfie,

perspective on understanding the relationship between users

highlighting the key insights that motivated me to revise the

and objects, whereas Wagner et al. (2012) offered a “material-

framework.

iconographic lexicon of artistic materials” to describe
unconventional and traditional uses of materials within art

Initial design of the Shelfie framework

and how their selection adds meaning to art work.

The first design of the framework had the key design concepts

The above works help in establishing a theoretical foundation

consumption lens. The production lens described how a

of material-centred interaction design. However, there remains
a lack of understanding of how to take these theoretical
strands forward and apply them in practice and to a specific
context. Considering this, I have developed a framework Shelfie
that illustrates 16 key design concepts through design cards.
The Shelfie design cards are created to make the framework
prescriptive and easy to use for design researchers and
students interested in exploring material representations of

mapped across two broad lenses: production lens and
designer could shape the physical appearance of a
representation. While the consumption lens was crucial in
understanding the intrinsic cognitive relation and value of the
representation as driven by the user’s data and properties as
described in Table 5.
Each lens had 9 design properties (18 in total), distributed
equally across 3 nested layers. Priority of these design

physical activity data further.

properties decreased when moving away from centre. To

Towards designing a framework

made use of Lego bricks (that denote the concepts) and

represent the key concepts and three layers across two lens, I

I used an iterative approach towards designing a framework

wooden circular tray (that represents the layers) as seen in

aimed at supporting future explorations in material

Figure 54.

representations for physical activity. The core strategy used to
build this framework was to analyse findings from the three
case studies, SweatAtoms, TastyBeats and Edipulse. I started with
the lessons learnt from designing and studying these systems,
and formulated an initial draft of important design concepts. I

Figure 54: Initial version of the Shelfie framework had
two lens: production and consumption lens that
acknowledge the shared agency between user and
designer while creating material representations.

conducted multiple informal and focussed group discussions
with colleagues to strengthen and refine these concepts. I was
particularly interested in developing a tangible framework
because tangibility enables the physical manipulations of
ideas and allows for the designer to focus their mental

PRODUCTION
LENS

processes in an actionable way upon physical objects (Antle et
al. 2009). Supporting this idea, I explored different tangible
forms such as Lego bricks, wooden trays, and finally settle
down onto design cards, to represent the framework.
One of the initial designs of the framework included 18 design
concepts defined across two lenses - production and
consumption lens (Refer Figure 54). However, the in-lab
evaluation of the framework with experts highlighted that the
model was very descriptive, and utilising the concepts in
design process was not straight-forward. These insights
motivated me to refine the framework in order to make it
easier to use in practice. To achieve this, I utilised design cards
to describe the concepts of the framework, drawing inspiration
from existing literature within HCI (Bekker and Antle 2011;
Deng et al. 2014; Mueller et al. 2014; Hornecker 2010; Lucero
and Arrasvuori 2010) that uses design cards as a “lightweight
and accessible” way of transferring knowledge from design
theory to practice (Rogers 2004). The refined framework Shelfie
has 16 key design concepts defined through design cards,
which designers can directly utilise during the ideation phase

CONSUMPTION
LENS

Page 85 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

LAYER
1

Function

Designer’s intended purpose for the material representation, e.g. to enable richer
Qualities of the material representation that go beyond the intended purpose, e.g.
sustainability.

Use

Values of the material representation concerning its use, e.g. decorative or practical
object.

Form

5

Data

Aspects regarding the used data, e.g. data type.

Physical

Physical properties that can be used for representing data, e.g. size or texture.

variables
Visual mapping

6

Process of mapping abstract data to a material form, e.g. mapping size to amount of
physical activity.

Fabrication

8

Process

General process of 3D printing, e.g. manual or automatic.

Timing

Duration and point in time the material representation is printed, e.g. during a physical
activity.

Frequency

9

How often the material representation is printed, e.g. every month or on special
occasions.

LAYER
1

Purpose
Qualities

3

7

DESCRIPTION

reflection on physical activity.

2

4

PROPERTY

Identity

PROPERTY

Self

DESCRIPTION

Extent to which a material representation is in line with the user’s identity, thoughts and
likes.

2
3

Authenticity

Identification and mapping of distinctive characteristics of individuals in material form.

Autonomy

Innate abilities to affect the design of material representation by experimenting with
physical activity routines.

Information

Perceived understanding of the material representation and the mapped data.

5

Motivation

Incentives provide by material representations to encourage physical activity.

6

Utility

Other imagined uses of material representations by the users.

Context

Contextual settings that affect the interactions with material representations.

8

Pairing

Association of material representations with other material artefacts and people.

9

Attachment

Level of engagement with material representations in terms of time.

4

7

Meaning

Ecology

Table 5: Detailed description of the initial Shelfie framework.

The framework was designed to be used during the ideation

allows the designers to quickly reflect on what other

phase, and the basic use of the framework was as follows:

properties need to be considered to design for their

1)

Designers choose a Lego brick related to a design concept.

2)

Designers place the brick in a corresponding level defined
on the wooden tray.

3)

Designers step back and visually get a summary of design
concepts that they have moved into the tray. This summary

specific context. Figure 55 illustrates the arrangement of
Lego bricks in the wooden tray.
4)

The process repeats until all bricks are used.

Page 86 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

To evaluate the effectiveness of the framework, I conducted a

terminology, in order to improve understanding of the

workshop with eight participants (6 male, 2 female) from the

underlying design theme. The revised design framework is

nearby research community, comprising of academics as well

presented below.

as IT professionals with their age between 21-45 years. I
received mixed feedback from participants during the

Shelfie: The framework

workshop. On one hand, participants appreciated the tangible

Shelfie stands for on-shelf (material) representations of the

aspect of the framework that supports a quick visual summary

self. The aim of Shelfie is to help designers in designing

of the key concepts of material representations, and gives a

material representations of the physical activity data. Shelfie

broad perspective on the variety of dimensions to consider

consists of a deck of 16 cards divided equally among four

during the ideation phase. However, at the same time,

categories: Mapping, Outcome, Material, and Process. Each card

participants found the framework overly complicated. They

represents a key design aspect that designers should consider

highlighted that the framework needed to be simple and more

while designing material representations.

accessible if it is to be used in practice. The biggest concern

The framework also utilises Lego bricks and flat Lego sheet as

was the ambiguity of certain terms and I found that some
design themes carried different meanings to different people.
As an example, the term production and consumption was
confusing to some participants. Participants wanted to have a
well-defined description of each design concept with depicted
illustrations on how to use it in their design. A couple of
participants suggested to place descriptive cards alongside the
Lego bricks to offer supplementary information about those
design concepts. Another concern was the lack of order, which
made participants wonder on how to move across different
design concepts, e.g., should the designer start with the
production lens and then move to consumption lens or vice
versa. One participant suggested using Lego bricks of different
sizes to solicit priority in terms of the design choice. Similarly,
it was also not clear if participants should incorporate all
design concepts in their design or they could omit some

physical props to arrange the design cards. The Lego bricks are
labelled after the design themes such that for each design
theme, there are five Lego bricks. The aim of these physical
props is to enhance the ideation phase with physicality of Lego
bricks, which not only provide a visual summary of the all
design concepts, but also allows designers to manipulate
different design themes as per their needs. A copy of the
framework is available here: http://rohitashokkhot.com and
http://exertiongameslab.org/projects/shelfie.
The final deck of 16 design cards is the result of careful
sorting, synthesising and discussing each card with 4
interaction designers working in a similar domain. I paid
special attention to the content and layout of the cards such
that the cards are more easy to understand and applicable in
practice. To begin with, while choosing the layout for each

depending on their requirements.

card, I worked on different possibilities for the font size, colour

Considering the feedback of participants, I revised this

the depth and clarity of the presented information. I took

framework by using design cards that carry descriptive text
and a visual illustration of the design theme. Additionally, I
also decided not to use layers and hence dropped using the

and content length. My aim was to strike a balance between
inspiration from earlier design cards like Tango cards (Deng et
al. 2014) and IDEO cards to design the framework cards.

circular wooden tray and opted for a flat Lego sheet instead. I
also worked on the textual content for each card in order to
make the cards simpler and not having any complicated

Figure 55: Setup of the Shelfie 1.0 used during a focus group.

Page 87 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

I then iteratively engaged in informal discussions with

the picture and describes ‘the design theme’ in a couple of

colleagues for feedback on the layout and content of the card.

lines. The theme description also mentions a ‘strategy’, which

For example, to highlight the importance of ageing of material,

suggests possible ways of implementing the design theme in

initially the theme was named as “ephemerality” - which I

real-world context. These suggestions are formulated from the

renamed as ‘lifetime’ based on the feedback. The rest of the

findings of the three case studies as well as from the design of

cards are similarly phrased in easy to understand language.

these systems.

Similarly, I carefully chose a representative image for each

Framework Categories

design theme. Previous research on design cards suggests that
accompanying picture on each card plays an important role in

Shelfie is defined through four categories, which I explain next.

representing the card, as it provides a visual summary of the

1. Mapping: The first category is Mapping that helps designers

card (Deng et al. 2014). To this end, the image should not be

in identifying different ways of translating physical activity

too specific to restrict the ideation space to a particular

data into a material form. This category includes four design

context; and at the same time, it should not be too general

themes - Purpose, Framing, Personalisation and Timing’ which

that designers find it hard to relate to the design task at hand.

are illustrated through four design cards represented by the

Consequently, I picked up majority of the images from the

colour orange.

three case studies detailed in this thesis. The other sources of

2. Outcome: The second category is Outcome that aids

images include Pexels15 and Unsplash16 , which are repositories
of stock-free images.

Layout of the design cards
Each design card of Shelfie is approximately 64mm x 100mm

designers in choosing the look and feel of a material artefact.
This category includes four design themes:Newness, Readability,
Utility and Pairing, and the corresponding four design cards are
coloured blue.

in size and is colour-coded by category. The card displays the

3. Material: The third category is Material that helps designers

following five sets of information related to the design theme

in choosing the right material for representing physical activity

described on the card. A Blueprint card is shown in Figure 56.

data. This category includes four design themes: Lifetime,

1) Design theme: The first piece of information on the card is
the name of the design theme. In one word, the design theme

Frequency, Necessity and Multi-sensory represented through 4
green coloured design cards.

describes the key aspect of designing material representations

4. Process: The final category is Process that places an

for physical activity data. The theme is written in bold and

emphasis on the selection of an appropriate manufacturing

occupies the top-left corner of the card. If the name of the

process for creating material artefacts of personal data. This

design theme is X then the designer should read the card as,

category includes cards belonging to four design themes:

“Consider X in the design”. Designers should focus on the

Involvement, Visibility, Duration and Autonomy. The cards are

‘design theme’ first, before moving to other pieces of

coloured red.

information displayed on the card.

Next, I describe the 16 design cards (refer Figure 57) one by

2) Aim: The second piece of information, written just beneath

one, and describe in detail how they were derived from my

the design theme is the aim. The aim describes the resultant

findings and analysis of my three case studies.

outcome of the given design theme. As such, if X is the design
theme and Y is the prescribed aim, then the card should be
read as, “Consider X in the design to achieve Y”
3) Illustrative image: The third piece of information is an
example image of the design theme, selected either from the
three case studies or from the public repositories such as
Unsplash and Pexels. The intention of displaying an image is to
support the design theme with a visual cue.
4) Theme description and strategy: The final piece of
information is the ‘theme description’ that resides underneath

15http://pexels.com
16

http://unsplash.com

Page 88 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Figure 56: Each Shelfie card contains four set of
information.

Figure 57: Shelfie deck at a glance

Page 89 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

1. Mapping - Purpose
The first card in the Mapping category is Purpose, which draws
the designer’s attention to think about the overall aim of
creating material representations of physical activity data. To
this end, one key Purpose would be to help people start or
maintain a physically active lifestyle. This broad purpose can
be fulfilled in various ways. For instance, the Purpose could be

motivation in addition to the intrinsic motivations that several
users already had. I found that participants with predefined
targets (such as losing weight or going back to their old active
routine) were more willing to take advantage of the
motivational features provided by the representations. As a
result, they adjusted their routine to incorporate different
forms of physical activity to become more physically active.

framed as a pursuit of virtue where individuals identify and

For such users (i.e. who have an intrinsic motivation for being

develop character strengths in relation to their fitness-related

physically active), setting Purpose as an eudaemonic pursuit

goals, through material representations of their data (Li et al.

with the focus on data might be sufficient enough where

2011; Lupton 2016). Psychologists termed such activities as

material representations help them to keep track of their

eudaemonic pursuits (Huta 2013; Henderson et al. 2013). As

progress. However, users who wanted to change their

such, while creating material representations, the focus should

behaviour but did not commit to taking actions could benefit

be on collected data such that the created knowledge can lead

from setting Purpose as hedonic pursuit with the focus on

to improvements in self. Earlier studies highlight that self-

external rewards, where hedonic material representations

knowledge alone may not be sufficient to encourage users

could provide them a necessary initial push. Although, the

towards their goals (Lazar et al. 2015; Klasnja et al. 2011). To

reward structure of material representation should be tailored

keep people motivated, designers may need to paint their

to suit an individual’s needs and aspirations, setting Purpose as

physical activity with a ‘hedonic gloss’. By hedonic gloss, I am

a joint pursuit for both ‘hedonic and eudaemonic’ experience

referring to pleasures, joy and satisfaction associated with

might offer the best of both worlds.

receiving material representations as rewards. The importance
of pleasurable rewards is also iterated in earlier works, which
highlight the revitalising function of rewards in encouraging
people to pursue their goals (Henderson et al. 2013;
Hassenzahl et al. 2013, Locke and Latham 1990).
In all the three systems, I worked with the aim of making
physical activity a pleasurable experience through different
forms of material representations. In the case studies, I found
that participants treasured receiving these material
representations and considered them as a reward to their
invested efforts. Their inclination towards material
representations was not just for achieving knowledge about
self, but it was also for having a positive outlook and some
form of encouragement at the end of the day. In this regard,
they appreciated receiving feedback in the form of an Emoji,
and Slogan through EdiPulse, and a Frog in SweatAtoms. For
many participants, the pursuit for getting a bigger glass of
sports drink or super happy Emoji contributed to an increase in
physical activity amongst said participants. As such, all three
systems served a joint pursuit of receiving hedonic
(pleasurable) and eudaemonic (meaningful) experiences from
physical activity. On one hand, these systems allowed
participants to create and attain their self-driven activity goals,
while on the other hand, the produced material
representations (reward) also kept them motivated to lead an
active life.
Although the material representations created by the
developed systems provided extrinsic motivation to the
participants, they proved to be a form of supplementary

Page 90 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 91 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

2. Mapping - Framing
The second card in the Mapping category is Framing. This
design theme describes the way of structuring the feedback on
one’s physical activity through material representations. This
theme is important to consider because raw unexplained data
can lead to discouragement amongst users (Gockley et al.
2006). I classify the Framing in two categories: positive and
negative framing. Positive framing presents the feedback in an
encouraging way, giving more emphasis on what the user has
achieved than the unachieved goals. The negative framing
highlights on the unachieved goals and the losses associated
with it. As an example, missing an exercise session in the gym
can be framed as follows: “No worries mate! Tomorrow is
another day!” - (Positive framing); and “You missed the session
again. You seem to be bit lazy lately!” - (Negative framing).
Positive framing of the data can be more persuasive towards
achieving goals than negative framing. On the other hand,
negative framing can grab user’s attention. Earlier works by
Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) and Taylor and Brown (1988)
highlight that positively framed feedback supports self-esteem,
health, growth, and perseverance. However, an overly positive
framing creates an illusion of the self, which is dangerous as
the individual fails to critically reflect on their activity goals
(Robins and Beer 2001). Therefore, negative framing is also

I argue that material properties play a very important role in
making the feedback as negatively or positively framed. Since I
used materials like chocolate, and sports drinks, with which
participants share immediate affection, even the negatively
framed feedback served as an aspiration goals to become
active. For instance, getting a small quantity of drink from the
TastyBeats system, and getting a sad Emoji printed in EdiPulse
system did not discourage participants, rather motivated them
to be active on the following day. This is contradictory with the
findings of Fishn’Steps system (Lin et al. 2006) where
participants did not want to look at the fish based avatar of
their data when they were inactive because they knew the fish
would have been sad. This difference in participant’s attitude
towards negatively framed feedback was also contributed by
the serendipity that all three systems offered to participants.
For example, the material representations of these systems
were different everyday, therefore, there was always an
element of surprise of not knowing what the representations
may look like. For example, even though the participants were
aware of their sedentary hours in a day, they did not know how
the drink prepared by the TastyBeats would taste until they
consumed it. Therefore, the interest in these representations
persisted even in situations where the feedback was
‘negatively framed’.

important to convey information about certain aspects of one’s

Negative framing became challenging when the interactions

life that needs attention, such as sedentary time. However, the

with the system were in social settings, that is, in the presence

disadvantage is that the user can feel guilty of not achieving

of other people. Participants did not want to expose

their goals, thereby leading to disinterest in physical activity

themselves as inactive. They, felt the pressure to partake in

(Lin et al. 2006).

greater amounts of physical activity. For instance, in the

In this thesis, I have utilised a mix of positive and negative
framing across all three case studies. My overall aim was to
positively reinforce participants in achieving their health goals.
Consequently, I focussed on creating material representations
that are fun, enjoyable and follow affective benefits with the
user. As an example, SweatAtoms construct different sized Frog
depending upon the participant’s physical activity level.
Similarly, the petals of the Flower in EdiPulse and SweatAtoms
changed depending on how active the participant was across
different hours of the day. An important aspect of these
systems was that participants were never punished for not
doing physical exercise, but the quality of representations
increased with more physical activity. For instance, when the
participant was active throughout the day, the Frog became
bigger in size, and the sports drinks of TastyBeats had more
flavour. Additionally, irrespective of whether the participant
was active or inactive throughout the day, each system
provided participants with all the material representations which participants found very positive and encouraging.

TastyBeats study, when one participant received a weakflavoured drink for being less physically active than their
partner, it often felt worse to then see their partner receive a
fully-flavoured drink. Balancing the positive and negative
aspects of the data is a key in social context, especially when
personalisation becomes part of the broader design
considerations, as I describe in the next design theme.

Page 92 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 93 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

3. Mapping - Personalisation
The third card in the Mapping category is Personalisation. This
design theme highlights the importance of customising the
material representation to suit the recipient. Personalising
material rewards according to individuals is essential because
everyone follows different health-based goals, and achieve
these goals differently according to their lifestyle. Creating a
standard representation would therefore not be appropriate
since users may not consider the representation as an accurate
representation of themselves. This theme also looks at
reflective qualities of material representations, synonymous
with the individual’s understanding of the self. Since the
constructed material artefact serves as another manifestation
of the self, it becomes important to support self-expression
through these artefacts such that they reflect the user’s
identity properly.
In all three case studies, I tried to harness and highlight the
distinct aspects of individuals in the design of the created
material artefacts. For example, the Flower artefact in the
SweatAtoms and EdiPulse was specifically designed to capture
and to signify the unique patterns of an individual’s heart rate.
Significant increases or decreases in the heart rate were
mapped to an evolving floral pattern. Since these shifts in
heart rate differed from person to person and also from one
day to another, the resulting floral pattern in the Flower
artefact varied for each participant everyday. Participants
appreciated the Flower representation because it represented
their physical activity data in a unique personalised material
artefact.

getting what they deserved for the day. In one instance,
however, one participant did trick the TastyBeats system by
using data from his more active. Interestingly, however, he
described how cheating the system felt bad and that he
considered himself as undeserving of the created sports drink.
There were also instances when participants wanted to
include more personal elements into the material artefacts.
For example, participants wanted to use their favourite colour
to print SweatAtoms artefacts. In EdiPulse, participants wanted
to use their favourite drinks, and similarly, in EdiPulse,
participants desired to receive activity treats made of their
favourite food. Similarly, in EdiPulse, participants appreciated
receiving a Slogan that reflected their schedule rather than
getting general, custom-made messages. For instance, in one
example, when EdiPulse printed a Slogan to encourage a
participant to jog the following day he felt bad since his
following day was packed with different meetings at office,
and therefore, it was not an appropriate message for him.
To conclude, material representation can be personalised in
different ways: by incorporating individual’s preferences
related to different shapes, colours and materials. Another
level of personalisation can be achieved by getting deeper
access to participant’s everyday life, e.g., contextual
information related to their work life, using demographics and
individual’s motivation towards set goals. In such scenarios,
physiological measures such as heart rate may not be wholly
sufficient. The system would require access to a greater
amount of sensors, such as GPS from their smartphone, or
access to their personal or social life through applications like
FaceBook or digital calendars. Such additional tracking

Interestingly, the personalised material artefacts from these

practices obviously raise greater privacy concerns and can

systems became very personal to participants. Participants

affect the ambiguous nature of the artefacts (i.e. a Flower

developed affection for the sports drink created through

artefact means nothing to someone who doesn’t themselves

TastyBeats and for the chocolate treats created by the EdiPulse

have one, but a Graph may indicate to an observer that the

system. They happily showed these representations to their

individual has been really inactive, or active at times they

friends, and posted them on social networks. To this end, the

should have been working) Special attention must be paid in

artefacts from SweatAtoms readily became part of home

abstracting out the personal aspects of the data so that it

ambience. Participants decorated their home with Flower and

offers meaning to the individuals but remain esoteric to other

Frog artefacts of different days. They even showed off the

bystanders.

TastyBeats and EdiPulse systems to visitors. However, they rarely
shared (or gifted) these artefacts to others. For instance,
participants preferred to preserve their chocolate treats and
sports drinks to consume later, but never really gifted them to
others. This contrasting behaviour of participants leads to an
interesting question that whether the designers should focus
on personalising the design of material representations or
whether they should try to focus on nurturing social
interactions around them.
Another interesting highlight was that participants generally
did not want to trick the system and they were satisfied with

Page 94 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 95 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

4. Mapping - Timing
The fourth and final design card under the Mapping category is
Timing. This design theme puts emphasis on the timing of the
feedback, communicated through the creation or delivery of
the material representations. This theme is important because
providing accurate, positive and timely feedback on data is
crucial to sustaining user’s engagement in physical activity.
Patel et al. (2015) in particular, suggest that feedback on data
should be presented at times when the user is most likely to
notice it.
Using these suggestions, Timing considerations for feedback
would be: ‘before’, ‘during’ and ‘after’ a physical activity. To begin
with, the ‘before’ option seems impractical, as there would be
no data available to create material representations. We can
create good looking material representations without
embedding any data in them, such artefacts would remain
primarily to serve the purpose of external tangible rewards.
Participants may not carry any personal connection or
association with such artefacts, as embedded personal data
was one of the major engagement factors identified through
all three of my case studies.
The second Timing option ‘during’ allows the user to get
feedback on their ongoing performance. The advantage is that
such a strategy enables user to think ahead of their next
action, and adjusting the activity as it unfolds based on the
feedback - thus helps in improving the user efficiency. Now, if
the material representations are created ‘during’ or in parallel
to physical activity, then a user can directly influence the
material representation by changing the course of their
activity. However, this would assume that the physical activity
takes place near the fabrication process such as 3D printing,
which is not always suitable as managing the 3D printing
process in runtime requires technical expertise. As such, the
‘during’ option is not currently viable with 3D printing.
However, this would work in custom made systems like
TastyBeats, where the visceral process of displaying data
through interactive fountains kept participants engaged in the
physical activity. This was particularly, found in the public
demonstration of TastyBeats when the interactive fountain
invited social interactions, and people started having fun
around the water shoots that a user was creating by doing
different sorts of exercise on real-time. This has also been
shown to be true in screen based representations such as
Versus gym17 where gym trainers get real time feedback on the
actions on the screen. Translating these current on screen
practices to tangible material representations is exciting, and
as TastyBeats illustrates, could be possible.

17

http://versus.com

The final option, ‘after physical activity’, allows the possibility
for users to think and reflect on their physical activity
performance and then alter their approach or make different
choices next time they partake in that activity In exploring my
research objectives, and in an attempt to answer my research
question, I followed this temporal option: delivering the
material representations to participants after they have
completed some amount of physical activity. Fortunately, my
participants also appeared to appreciate this delayed mode of
receiving feedback.
Giving feedback in a delayed manner kept participants away
from the continuous stream of data and allowed them to
concentrate on the activities at hand. Additionally, having to
wait for their material representations gave them anticipatory
reasons to look forward to their material artefacts from the
day. Participants always wanted to get a positive Slogan and a
super happy Emoji from EdiPulse system every day. Similarly, in
SweatAtoms, participants wanted to get a bigger Frog. Since
there was uncertainty in accurately predicting whether they
have done enough activity to receive better looking material
representations, participants continued to be active
throughout the day and unknowingly did more exercise.
As such, ‘during’ strategy of feedback supports reflection on the
go and is suitable when the individual is interested in
improving upon specific parts of exercise. Therefore, they need
to see the emerging process of exercise. This is the case with
majority of the existing self-monitoring devices where users
can see the continuous stream of physiological data through a
mobile app or on the small screen embedded on the device.
On the other hand, ‘after’ strategy can support slow reflection
(Odom et al. 2014) on the daily mundane routine when the
user is interested to reflect upon how the day went, and then
use this knowledge to bring actionable changes in the
lifestyle.

Page 96 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 97 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

5. Outcome - Newness
The first theme in the Outcome category is Newness. This
design theme invites designers to pay attention towards
incorporating novel factors in the design of material
representations. Earlier studies highlight the importance of the
look and feel of an artefact in grabbing user’s attention and
driving its initial use (Wrigley 2011). Users consider the first
look of an artefact to make judgments related to its use,
whether it is good or bad, safe or dangerous (Norman 2004).
Newness of an artefact plays a crucial role in making it

chocolate and sports drinks. I believe that these aspects material and process - had a significant role in inviting user’s
attention in the first place. Using materials that were familiar
to users in their daily lives (e.g., plastic and food), to create
material representations for physical activity intrigued
participants in trying out the system. Their initial interest was
to see how an artefact could reflect one’s personal data such
as heart rate. However, their interest persisted mainly because
these materials allowed their physical data to manifest in a
physical form - which made them unique and more desirable.

desirable. One might argue how newness is different from

Regarding the process, all the systems utilised a new process

novelty. Novelty could be because of the thrill of owning a

to create the artefacts, which initially invited user attention.

brand new possession, which lends a short-term value to the

Although 3D printing and chocolate printing was new for

artefact. But newness is related to a continuous element of

participants, they all expressed some level of familiarity with

surprise that the artefact offers to users. Newness in the design

the technology due to the technologies being increasingly

(or look) of an artefact helps in creating sustained engagement

reported on in the media, although none of the participants

of the user with the artefact. According to Dinnin (2009), three

had ever used 3D or chocolate printers prior to the study. At

factors create the perception of newness in an artefact:

the start of the study, some participants were very excited with

situational product involvement, a sense that the product is

the opportunity of having a 3D printer at home and being able

pristine, and the physical possession. The immediate value of a

to use it daily. However, their interest in the printing process

new artefact is derived from the hedonic experience of being

faded over time, while their interest in the constructed

the first user of a product. The important point here is that, if

artefacts persisted throughout the study period, possibly

the artefact only had novelty, the thrill of possessing the new

because, as explained, the material artefacts embodied their

artefact fades away over time (Dinnin 2009). On the other

personal data and were new every day. To this end, three

hand, artefacts that continue to have newness may move to

participants even expressed an interest in receiving the

the background after a certain period of time. But that does

artefacts directly in their mailbox rather than printing them at

not mean that the artefact has lost its value, rather it has

home. This interest further suggests that the participants were

become an integral part of the individual’s life.

able to differentiate between the appeal of 3D printing and

In all three case studies, Newness of material representations
played an important part in sustaining participant’s
engagement with the system and in relation to their physical
activity. Some of the representations were considered fresh,
while others were considered to be familiar. Interestingly,
participants appreciated representations, which they
considered to be good looking, such as the Frog from
SweatAtoms, which every participant adored; and the
chocolate printed Emoji that was compared to a human smiling
on their achievements. Representations such as the Graph, and
Dice did not gain the same appreciation, however, as they were
familiar and not so visually appealing. Additionally, since
representations could change daily based on the participant’s
daily activity, participants always found Newness in these
representations. As such, these systems offered an emergent
way of representing data where the forms or content of
representation changed daily, thus adding a sense of
serendipity in the overall experience.
Some might argue that the overall positive experience with
material representations was partly due to the involvement of
new technologies like 3D printing or appealing materials like

personalised 3D artefacts. However, in the case of TastyBeats,
participants’ interest in seeing the fountain interaction
sustained throughout, as the interaction was always new
based on the activities of a day. It was not only “eye candy” to
them, but was also helpful in allowing them to reflect on their
daily activity. For instance, seeing what pumps were shooting
the drink ingredients provided a visual summary of the
individual’s activities. I therefore, suggest using appealing
materials, and novel representation strategies to sustain user’s
interests in the created material representations.

Page 98 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 99 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

6.Outcome - Readability
The second card in the Outcome category is Readability. This
design theme places an emphasis on creating the material
representations so that they are easy to interpret, yet provide
essential information related to user’s physical activity. Raw
and complex representations of the collected data do not

participants, as I found in my own case studies, in terms of: 1)
understanding which representations relay what information,
and 2) how their shapes differ to represent the change in data.
However, if the data is simple, these difficulties diminish
within a couple of days as participants receive more
representations to learn from.

support essential reflection, as interpreting such information

While deciding the Readability of material representations, it is

requires cognitive expertise, which users may not have (Hansel

also crucial to understand the level of abstraction required to

et al. 2016). As such, a representation should be able to offer

map the data into material form. For instance, an individual

key insights at a glance. The form and functionalities of the

might desire more abstraction and privacy in a public setting,

design may not always encourage the required action, as users

whereas the same individual might appreciate a more detailed

often have different expectations and interpretation abilities

mapping between the data and material representation to

when it comes to understanding a design (a material

enable an in-depth understanding of the self in a private

representation, in this case). According to Ham and Midden

setting. In the SweatAtoms study, participants liked the idea of

(2010), a subtle and ambient presentation of the data are key

having a physical object that cannot be identified as being

in motivating and subconsciously triggering a behaviour

related to their physical activity easily; and therefore its

change, because such representations require less conscious

significance is only revealed if the user wants to reveal it. In

attention, as well as cognitive efforts from user. As a result,

order to create varied levels of abstraction, designers can

they can be more persuasive. However, representing data in a

explore different properties of a material such as colour, shape,

physical form includes technical and cognitive challenges,

texture, and design. Additionally, abstraction can also be

since embedding complex data into the artefact may not be

explored through multiple layers where multiple material

easy to interpret (Stusak et al. 2016). Embedding too much

artefacts, each carrying a different data, can be joined together

information within artefacts might make them less readable,

to reveal more insights about an individual’s active life. Unlike

while embedding less data might make the artefact less

screen-based systems, material artefacts can afford distributed

meaningful.

interactions with several material artefacts in a large confined

In all three systems, I have focused on representing lesserknown information (such as heart rate zones) as well as
making the design more speculative than informative. In all
three case studies, participants preferred metaphorical
ambient representations of their data rather than a more
informative counterpart. For instance, in the SweatAtoms study,
the Frog was the favourite of all representations and it was
readily displayed in the participants’ surroundings, despite the
fact that it contained very little obvious information about
their physical activity. Instead, the Frog supported the
comparative reflection of user’s physical activity in a very
simple way, and was easy to interpret even from a distance.
More informative representations like the Graph and Dice did
not receive much appreciation from participants. In EdiPulse,
the Emoji and Slogan representations were found to be more
appealing than the Graph and Flower representations. The
chocolate Emoji provided a very quick summary of the
participant’s day in what was considered to be a humane
manner. This suggests that the material representations should
be easy to read and interpret, although the embodied
information can be as subtle as “I did more physical activity
today than I did yesterday.” This is in line with earlier study
findings by Lazar et al. (2015) where participants reported
preference towards a simple report card. However, the abstract
representations might initially require a little effort from

space (Hornecker 2005). Users can join, interlock, and mix
material artefacts to generate additional meaning (Khot et al.
2016; Nissen et al. 2014).

Page 100 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 101 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

7. Outcome - Utility
The third card in the Outcome category is Utility. This design
theme relates to the additional utility values that material
representations offer besides the main purpose of providing
feedback on physical activity. If the material artefact affords
different purposes in everyday life, the user will engage and
interact with them more often - thereby, making the artefacts
an integral part of their life. Unlike digital representations, a
material representation carries the benefit of fulfilling other
practical purposes such as being a decoration piece or a
personalised gift. Designers should consider how users could
embed the material representations in everyday life when
designing the artefacts. The interesting point here is that the
user may not necessarily utilise the material artefact in
accordance with the use expected by the designer. Users often
bring their creativity and imagination into play when sketching
use cases of different material artefacts in their life.

immediately displayed in the surroundings as adorable
decorative pieces. More creatively, one participant turned the
Flower model into a floating candleholder, allowing their
candles to float on water, whereas another participant wanted
to stack his entire set of Dice models in the form of a
skyscraper, publicly advertising his physical activity
performance. One participant even transformed all of the
constructed artefacts into a clock to be used as a decoration
piece. However, for representations such as the Ring and Graph,
participants could not identify any immediate use. Although
participants explored different utilities for their material
representations, their interactions with artefacts like the Ring
and Graph, and food artefacts would have been different if they
revealed any extra utility. For instance, if the Graph has loops
on both ends, it might have been a bracelet. Similarly, if the
chocolate treats were thicker in size, they could have served as
personalised gifts. However, making chocolate thicker might
have defeated the overall purpose of rewarding, i.e. a small

While designing material representations of physical activity

amount of dark chocolate is healthier than a lot of dark

data through three different systems, I expected to observe

chocolate. Therefore, designers should aim to support creative

several practical utilities of each representation. The use of

usages of the material representations, through either

sports drinks and chocolate in the TastyBeats and EdiPulse case

explicitly prescribing the Utility, or keeping the design open to

studies were considered as straight forward, i.e I expected that

encourage user experimentation. However, care needs to be

they would naturally serve the purpose of drinking and eating

taken since the additional utility should not overcome the

respectively. However, I also thought that participants will gift

main purpose of the representations.

their personalised drinks and chocolate treats to their loved
ones, in cases that they didn’t want them themselves.
Surprisingly, however, these representations were considered
very personal and participants never shared them with others.
In a few instances, when the chocolate treats were instead
eaten by participants’ family members, the main reason was so
that the food (chocolate) would not go to waste. One reason as
to why this occurred could be that these representations did
not afford the utility of being a gift, for example, the chocolate
treats were very thin and followed a stretched structure.
Packaging these representations as a gift would not only be
difficult, but would also not look as good as a bought
chocolate from the market, however, with improvement to
chocolate printing process, it could be possible to print better
shaped chocolates that can be gifted. As such, with
consumable materials like chocolate and sports drink, the
intention should be to serve immediate consumption. I
describe this aspect in more details in the Necessity design
theme.
In contrast, the participants’ reaction with durable materials, as
used in SweatAtoms was quite different. In SweatAtoms, I
designed the Frog to serve as a decorative object, whilst I
designed the Ring and Flower to serve as fashionable jewellery.
Participants, to my surprise and delight, explored different
uses of these representations. The Flower and Frog were

Page 102 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 103 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

8. Outcome - Pairing
The The final card in the Outcome category is Pairing. This
design theme is concerned with the context in which the
artefact fits in, and highlights the importance of designing
artefacts so that they complement the existing schema of

appreciate the Ring model mainly because they did not like
wearing plastic-made rings. Alternatively, however, the sports
drinks and chocolate treats became a part of participants
energy needs, and participants expressed a want to track and
represent their food to complement their needs.

artefacts already part of the surroundings. Jung (2011)

When considering the pairing it is not just the material

emphasised that user experience with the use and ownership

representations that need to be considered, but the systems

of artefacts is interleaved with the underlying context and

that create them also need to match the existing environment.

surrounding. This theme therefore, identifies how individual’s

For instance, while SweatAtoms resided in the lounge room of

interactions with material artefacts differ in different

participants, EdiPulse and TastyBeats found their place in

environments. Pairing of an artefact within the surroundings

participants’ kitchen work surfaces.. Participants also

derives its Utility, which I discussed in the previous design

expressed their interest in making the 3D printers look less

theme.

mechanical so that they look like a part of their home

Goffman (1959) attributes humans as actors that take on
various identities for different audiences, and where the goal
of social interaction is to seek approval from these audiences.
Borrowing Goffman’s analogy of the public and private stage
(Goffman 1959), there is a clear distinction in terms of how an
individual presents himself to others in a public or private
setting. A material representation, similarly, has a different role
to play in a public and private context. Unlike a digital
visualisation that is represented on a 2D flat surface of a
computer or smartphone screen, physical visualisations require
consideration of its surrounding context, in which it will be
placed. For example, placing a material representation within a
home ambiance has to satisfy and cater to existing aesthetic
details and surroundings of that home, while an object that
has been designed to be worn should complement the
personality, body type, and dressing style of an individual. As
such, our interactions with material artefacts also depend on
the extent to which a material representation participates
within the system of artefacts. Verbeek (2005) brings forward
the tendency of artefacts to adjust and act according to the
environment in which they were situated. Similarly, Latour
(1999) suggests that artefacts work in a close relationship with
people and other artefacts, creating networks that shape each
other.
The findings of the SweatAtoms study revealed that one of the
reasons why participants appreciated the Frog and Flower over
other representations was that participants found immediate
applications and places where they could place these
representations. For example, the Frog was placed on the top
of a computer screen and the Flower was used as a coaster on
the dining table. Participants expressed this was because the
colour, design and shapes of these artefacts complemented
their home ambiance. As such, the suitability of the material
representations, in pairing with existing decorations, was
strongly dependent on the physical characteristics and the
type of material used. For example, participants did not

ambiance. For TastyBeats, participants wanted to make it a part
of their refrigerator, allowing them to receive their sports
drinks when needed, and keep all the drinks fresh and tasty.
Interestingly, TastyBeats grabbed different levels of attention in
private and public settings. For instance, when TastyBeats was
used in a social setting, with several viewers watching the user
interacting with the system, spilling of water was considered
fun. Contrastingly, when TastyBeats was placed in the home for
daily use, spilling was considered as an annoyance. It is
therefore important to identify the context where the material
representations will be used. People appreciate such material
artefacts that match or pair with belongings they already have.

Page 104 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 105 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

9. Material - Lifetime
The first card in the Material category is Lifetime. This design
theme emphasises the ageing property of the material
artefacts, and how it affects an individual’s relationship with
them. Previous literature on archiving suggests that material
artefacts have a longer life and are more valuable in personal
life than their digital counterparts (Petrelli et al. 2008;
Golsteijn et al. 2012; Kirk and Sellen 2010). These objects gain
value by progressive appropriations, that is, their value
increases over time and even if they get worn or cracked, they
continue to be the prized possession of owners (Lee et al.
2015). Every material has a shelf life after which they decay or
lose their beauty. The lifetime of durable materials is usually
longer than consumable materials like food but over time,
durable materials lose their lustre and may break. While,
materials like food perish in a relatively short space of time.
The study of SweatAtoms also reflected that most participants
wanted their material representations to age well, and hence
appreciated the use of plastic that could resist wear and tear.
However, they also raised concerns related to the sustainability
of these artefacts. For instance, if users receive these material
representations every day, then the question is what should
they do with them? With artefacts made up of plastic like
materials that do not decay directly, there is a responsibility of
creating and destroying them properly, since not all materials
are biodegradable. But the interesting point here is that since
these material artefacts stay with participants for a longer
duration, they afford the user a greater chance of reminiscence,
and reflection upon their efforts, for a longer period of time.
Users can preserve the artefacts as a reward of their physical
efforts and may interact with them afterwards.
On the other hand, using materials like food tackles some of
the problems associated with sustainability. Food based
representations, however, highlight distinct user interactions.
Firstly, our interactions with food are ephemeral — once it's
consumed, the "prize" for being active fades from the sight.
Additionally, people respect food, and do not ignore or waste
food served to them. Consequently, the message
communicated through food grabs greater attention, even if
the message reflects negative aspects of personal life. For
example, in the EdiPulse study, participants did not ignore a
sad face Emoji highlighting their inactive day, rather it became
a source of motivation to do more exercise the next day.
Similarly, participants never wasted the representations from
the EdiPulse and TastyBeats systems. Participants were also
very careful in using the supplied food materials (different
flavours of juice and chocolate bars), and made certain the use
the leftover materials the following day.

Varying lifetimes of different materials suggest different types
of interactions with them. While interactions with long-lasting
materials can support reminiscence and ad-hoc interactions
with personal data, interactions with perishable materials
bring a sense of urgency in users’ interactions with their data.
Designers could mix and match different types of materials to
enhance the user experience. One possible option could be
that participants print plastic based representations for days
when they were happy with their performance, and therefore
would want to preserve memories as souvenirs. While food
based representations may be used to highlight alarming or
negative aspects of one’s daily life, e.g. that participants find
unavoidable or non-engaging, in raw form.

Page 106 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 107 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

10. Material - Frequency
The second card in the Material category is Frequency. This
design theme describes an aspect of how often we interact
with different materials, which defines the frequency of
constructing these representations. Our interactions with
different materials such as screen-based, physical artefacts
and food-based representations show distinct patterns. We
interact with screens in short bursts of time. With physical
artefacts, we follow ad-hoc interactions. For instance, we can
hold an artefact, keep it in our palm for a long period and talk
about it, whenever there is a memory associated with it. While

every day for the purpose of the study. Participants mentioned
that printing these artefacts daily was not only time
consuming but also diminished the value of artefacts. Instead
they would have chosen to print their representations on days
when they achieved their goals. Identifying the correct
frequency of feedback is important because existing literature
suggests that although frequent feedback on data is
considered ideal to support behavioural change (Hermsen et
al. 2016), constant or repeated emphasis on achieving health
goals can also reduce user’s motivation to physical activity
(Berry and Latimer-Cheung 2013).

food can inhibit a scheduled pattern of interaction, for

On the other hand, food makes a good case for scheduling

example, most cultures consume three meals a day. Once the

feedback on self-monitored data in fixed intervals, for example,

satiety level is reached (i.e. people are satisfied and full), a

around meal times. Structuring interactions in such a way also

meal is no longer consumed. Similarly, people also have habits

means that feedback on data is not immediately available but

and particular patterns of consuming things. For instance,

is rather delayed to a certain time of the day, which is also

many people drink 2 cups of coffee in a day, some drink tea

appreciated in supporting slow reflection on data. However, if

before going to bed. While certain consumption comes as

the material is associated with celebrations such as chocolate

recommended guidelines (Sawka et al. 2007). For instance, an

and champagne, creating these artefacts can be scheduled on

adult should drink 8 glasses of water each day.

special occasions. As such, scheduling food-based

In SweatAtoms, interactions with the constructed physical
artefacts were not defined. Participants majorly utilised these
artefacts to decorate their home in the form of a clock,
coasters or simple decorations. These decorative pieces
remained in the background of their surroundings and came to
foreground as a conversation piece, when the participants
explained their purpose to visitors. The important point here is
that every representation did not become a part of the
surrounding, as it’s use was derived by the utility that
representation afforded, and how well it paired with the
participant’s surroundings, which I discussed earlier. With
TastyBeats, the interaction was scheduled in the evening. Some
participants enjoyed the drink after the evening meal as a
refreshing drink before going to bed. While others make it a
major part of their evening snack to follow a healthy lifestyle.
However, participants wanted the TastyBeats system to provide
the drink they deserve after a regular interval of time as a
replacement of other drinks. With EdiPulse, the interaction was
also scheduled in the evening, mainly as an evening snack, so
that the chocolate treat served as a dessert. Because of the use
of chocolate, participants were happy with printing these
representations once a day, particularly, in the evening as it
gives a sweet ending to the day.
The frequency of our interactions with different materials
therefore highlights the need to think about how frequently
we should offer material representations to users. If the
representation is mainly for fun, then construction requires
careful consideration before printing. For instance, in the
SweatAtoms study, participants printed their representations

representations could help users in developing better health
routines.

Page 108 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 109 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

11. Material - Necessity
The third card in the Material category is Necessity. This design
theme describes the properties of materials to satisfy certain
needs of an individual in relation to their physical activity. For
example, electrolytes or sports drinks can help in replenishing
loss of bodily fluids from pro-longed physical activity, whereas
materials like wool or cotton sportswear can support
persistence in physical activity under different weather
conditions (hot or cold weather). A representation constructed
from a material that the user needs could offer extra
motivation to the user in achieving their goals.
The Necessity can be utilised in different ways. For example,
we can utilise specific materials to initiate certain interactions,
whereas we can also design material representations to limit
our interaction with certain materials. For example, most
participants in the EdiPulse study were fond of chocolate. In
the beginning of study, they thought using chocolate could be
counterproductive to their health goals, and thought it might
tempt them to eat more chocolate. But as the study proceeded,
they were surprised to see that the use of chocolate helped in
moderating their craving for chocolate. Since they knew that
they would be eating a small chunk of chocolate in the
evening, they were happy to wait for what felt more like a
deserving treat, than an “evil” and “unhealthy” temptation.
Despite the chocolate being so accessible to them (as they had
to temper it themselves,), none of the participants felt tempted
to eat the chocolate at other times, choosing only to interact
with the chocolate when offering to the EdiPulse system. This
finding highlights that utilising the favourite materials of users
could positively reinforce them in achieving their health goals.
In TastyBeats, I found similar traits of behaviour where
participants were happy to wait. For example, a couple of
participants said that the study nurtured healthy eating habits,
where instead of eating something unhealthy as a snack, they
were happy to wait until the evening where they got what they
considered to be not only a healthy drink, but one tailored to
the amount of exercise they did that day. In another example,
one participant who felt they were slightly dehydrated from
cycling explained how he was happy to wait for the interaction
of TastyBeats to complete before quenching his thirst with a
well-deserved drink.
However, the Necessity of certain materials can be negated
when considering the question of satiety. With regards to food,
particularly, it would be difficult to consume food-based
representations once the satiety level is reached (stomach is
full). For example, a couple of participants in the TastyBeats
study mentioned that receiving sports drinks is good when
they are thirsty as they “really need it”, but when they are not
then the value of receiving the drink is diminished. Therefore,

the amount of these material representations is an essential
factor, such that they appropriately reflect on the user needs.
Additionally, it is also important to consider the ‘frequency’ of
our interactions with such materials (discussed earlier) to
decide on the amount and time of constructing material
representations.

Page 110 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 111 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

12. Material - Multisensory
The final card in the Material category is Multisensory. This
design theme advocates the use of multi sensory properties of
materials to enhance an individual’s engagement with material
representations. The aim is to include different forms of
sensory information in the material representations such that
the experience of reliving your physical efforts can be much
more cherishing. This theme is important to consider because
we use a combination of senses to perceive and experience the
world. Using multiple modalities will not only grab user’s
attention, but will also reduce the cognitive load associated
with using only one modality - typically visual (Spence 2002).
Additionally, the interplay of different senses together can
make the experience long lasting, thereby, creating a greater
impact of representations on a user’s motivation. For instance,
the use of a pleasant fragrance can create pleasurable
memories related to physical activity that the user could
cherish later.

Besides visual alone, other characteristics of material come
into play during the construction process. For instance, In
SweatAtoms, I utilised biodegradable plastic - PLA, which
causes a slightly striking smell during the printing process that
participants considered to be unpleasant. The unpleasant
smell along with the mechanical sound of the 3D printer did
not invite the participants to be engaged in the construction
process. In terms of the tangible qualities, the material
artefacts had a rigid and firm feel when touched. Participants
wanted to use a variety of materials such as rubber, or other
materials that had a softer texture. With TastyBeats,
participants enjoyed the visual fountain interaction of drinks
and the sound of water shooting from different tumblers. The
interaction was not only considered to be playful, but also
provided a good peek into the daily activities of the
participants. Finally, the taste of the created drink made the
experience cherishing. In EdiPulse, the melting chocolate
produced a pleasant smell, which kept the participants
engaged. The “musical” sound of the chocolate printer further

An essential aspect of the multi-sensory experience is that all

added to the participants’ experience. Consequently,

the senses should communicate the same message together

participants enjoyed looking at the printing process as it

(Hekkert 2006). In cases when different senses communicate a

encouraged and helped them in the slow process of reflecting

different message at the same time, the overall experience is

of their data.

not pleasurable since users are not able to focus on the
important aspects. For example, in the cosmetic industry,
colour, roughness, softness, and smell are all harmonised,
(through packaging for example), in order to provide a
prospective buyer with a positive multi-sensory experience
(Ludden et al. 2006). Hermsen et al. (2016) pointed out the
capabilities of different senses in their review of feedback
technologies. They highlighted that the visual mode is more
disruptive than the auditory medium, while auditory is, in turn,
more disruptive than tactile feedback. Moreover, the visual
medium offers more capacity for detailed information than
auditory, whilst the tactile, physical medium, offers less
capacity to accumulate or represent detailed information.
Therefore, different senses should be carefully chosen based
on what information needs to be communicated.
All three of the systems described in this thesis used different
materials and, therefore, offered different sensory
characteristics. The appearance of these material
representations was the main driving force for participants in
all of the respective case studies. For instance, the cute looking
Frog in SweatAtoms, was appreciated mainly because it was
always printed well, without any rough edges or extra lumps.
Similarly, participants wanted beautiful looking chocolate
representations from the EdiPulse system, and in cases where
the printed representations did not look as good as they
expected, participants printed the treats again.

As found in the case studies, appealing to multiple senses
enhanced the user experience and kept users engaged, even in
the process of creating artefacts. Different properties afforded
by the technology available (such as a 3D printer) can also add
to the experience. However, creating a multi-sensory
experience with materials is challenging, since some of the
design opportunities are also limited by the available
technology. For example, state-of-the-art 3D printers cannot
control variables such as temperature or moisture. In addition,
the fabrication of material representations with multiple
colours is challenging at this time. Similarly, there is only a
limited range of food that can be printed using food printers.
With increased interest from both academic and industrial
communities in digital fabrication, I expect that most of the
challenges will eventually become resolved.

Page 112 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 113 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

13. Process - Involvement
The first card in the Process category is Involvement. This
design theme describes the method of creating material
representations that can either be automatic or manual.
Following the advice of Connelly et al. (2006), I argue against
automated processes because it reduces the process of critical
self-assessment and regulation that happens when an
individual is actively involved in the making process.
Kahneman (2011) further argues, in his work, that humans are
inherently lazy thinkers and often take mental shortcuts relying on an automatic association created through repeated
exposure to an idea rather than taking the time to think about
a particular message and its implication. Therefore, by
involving users in the creation process of material
representations, we can increase the potential value of
material representations. This happens because the users feel
as though they have created the representation, possibly
making the representation more influential than a standard
generic form.
Material artefacts become mementos and by virtue of the time
and emotion invested in them by their owner. Creating an
artefact can be an enjoyable experience, giving individuals the
feeling of wonder, agency and satisfaction (Gauntlett 2013).
Thus, it is not usually the physical characteristic of the objects
that make them biographical, but the meaning imputed to
them as significant personal possessions.
Involving user is the creation process gives the user freedom
and the possibility to see how the material representation is
produced, it also requires that the user has access to a 3D
printer and suitable materials at home, as well as the time and
necessary skills to 3D print the material representations. Effort
is needed on the behalf of the designer to ensure that the
process is user-friendly and less prone to error. For example,
in TastyBeats, spilling was accidental and caused a mess on
nearby surfaces. On one hand, participants welcomed this mess
as a dramatic outcome of the playful interaction; while on
another hand, it also challenged their notion of playing with
consumable materials as for some of them food is mostly a
forbidden object to play with. This was an interesting finding
since I consider playing with consumable materials as an
opportunity. However, many participants think the opposite.
Therefore, designers need to consider the cultural beliefs of
participants when designing certain playful interactions
around the use of consumable materials or to offer multiple
methods of interactions with the artefacts.

Page 114 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 115 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

14. Process - Visibility
The second card in the Process category is Visibility. This theme
highlights the consequences of making the data publicly
visible. There is strong evidence that our behaviours are
shaped by the behaviours of our family, friends and people we
work with (Cialdini 2006). Therefore, by making the process of
creating material representations explicitly visible, we can
increase the chances of building a sense of commitment which
can likely lead to a change in behaviour, relating to the social
norm (Ledger and McCaffrey 2014).

design actually meant. Participants were enthusiastic to
explain the meaning of the artefacts to the inquisitive visitors.
Some participants also gave these artefacts to their loved ones
as a gift or ‘token of their heart’. Previously sharing of ones
inner most self has not been possible with current physical
activity trackers, and this opportunity illustrates how material
representations of one’s physical activity can extend beyond
the self, creating important mementos for not only the
individual, but also their loved ones. In much the same way
that loving parents collect their child’s baby teeth, handprints,
or record their child’s evolving height on the frame of a door,

Visibility can support two forms of social incentives:

material artefacts create a snapshot in time of an individual’s

Competition — where users can compare their data against

bodily data, encapsulating their healthy activities in a

others — and Co-operation — where users can work together

memorable souvenir. I can imagine in the future someone can

towards a set goal and motivate each other in doing so. Many

view this artefact as a memento of how the individual once

tracking devices already allow and encourage social sharing

was, not just in photos, but also in health and with aspirations

and comparison of the tracked data, and often employ

and goals and their dreams.

Gamification strategies (Deterding et al. 2011) and the social
norm approach (Cialdini and Goldstein et al. 2004). However,
the sharing of data is distributed over over the Internet, with
little data shared among co-located individuals (who share the
same space). Interestingly, physical effort is not good at
supporting “kinaesthetic empathy” (Fogtmann 2006), where
observers can read and decode the kinaesthetic actions of
users, however, the visceral process of creating material
artefacts can communicate relative efforts to peripheral
participants, and does so in a greater way than observations
alone.
In all three case studies, the visibility of material
representations played a role of a social catalyst, inviting
conversations around their aesthetics and use. The public
visibility of the TastyBeats and EdiPulse systems made it
possible for others to easily notice the data and served as a
conversation piece between participants and the observers.
Participants found watching the drink in TastyBeats be
prepared as one of the best parts of using the system, and
were very keen to also watch the creation of their partners’
drink in order to compare their relative amounts of physical
activity that day. Often the drink was made with both
participants present and, through watching the making
process, each participant became more aware of each other’s
physiological state, which in turn triggered discussions and
playful social interactions. Participants often competed to get
a bigger or more flavoursome drink, and moments of laughter
occurred when the prepared drinks were drastically different
for each other.
In the SweatAtoms study many participants showed their
printed artefacts to neighbours and visitors to their home.
These artefacts generated a sense of curiosity and sparked
conversations among the visitors who did not know what the

However, the public display of physical activity data can lead
to issues of privacy. Within this study, participants did not raise
such concerns, as the data was very abstract. Therefore, I
believe, one way to address privacy related concerns could be
through abstract forms of visualisations, as illustrated through
systems like TastyBeats, which provide only basic information
about one’s physical activity, hiding intrinsic details from the
user.

Page 116 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 117 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

15. Process - Duration
The third card in the Process category is Duration. This design
theme describes the time span of creating material
representations and ways of making that period engaging.

engaging: These factors are the: 1) sound of the machine, 2)
choice of the representation, 3) surprise element due to the
ad-hoc printing of letters, and 4) pleasant smell of the
material. As such, I encourage designers to accommodate the
characteristics of both the printer and material in their design

The Duration of creating material representations is usually

e.g., choosing a material that produces a pleasant (and safe)

lengthy in comparison to digital representations. It involves, at

smell when printing.

first, preparing the raw materials, setting up the system and
finally printing. Each of these steps takes time and effort from
the users. In recent times, investigations are being undertaken
to tackle the slowness of 3D printing and make the digital
fabrication process more efficient (Mueller et al. 2014). In
contrast, I would suggest that there is an opportunity to
embrace the slower making process as a useful design
resource to support delayed feedback of physical activity.
Because just as physical activity has several stages (warm up,
activity, cool down) the printing process can exaggerate a
similar temporal journey (warming up, printing artefact, letting
the artefact cool down).
For instance, in all three case studies, the Duration was
considered by participants as a time to reflect on their exercise
achievements for that day. This process also became a
conversation point for the participants where they compared
each other’s activities in a fun way of guessing who will get a
smiling Emoji, a bigger Frog or a more flavourful drink. In the
TastyBeats study, participants found the interactive process of
creating a sports drink as rewarding as consuming the drink
itself. In EdiPulse, all the participants loved the “musical”
sound that printer made. The sight and smell of chocolate
being slowly overlaid on the printer bed, further added to the
temptation of watching the entire process unfold. The
randomness in guessing the different parts of the Slogan,
while it was being printed, also added fun and intrigue to the
reveal. Although the preparation, in terms of getting the
chocolate ready for printing, was considered as an unnecessary
labour and annoyance, participants’ interest in the process was
sustained throughout the study. Participants expressed that
the benefits such as the excitement of seeing their data in a
tangible form were bigger than the “duties” they had to
perform before hand. I believe that the perceived value of the
material representation among the participants also increased
with the time they waited for it to finish printing. In future
explorations, it could be interesting to examine the
relationship between elapsed printing time and the size of the
reward (a long time and a small reward, vs., for example, a
short time and big reward). To this end, the slow reflection on
data in terms of the printing process was considered a
valuable part of the overall experience.
I, therefore, draw designers attention to four factors that can
make the process of creating material representation

Page 118 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 119 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

16. Process - Autonomy
The final card of the deck and the fourth card of the Process
category is Autonomy. This design theme suggests the benefits
of giving user the freedom and scope to innovate the design of
material representations through the use of their body and
movements.

representations - not only to improve their understanding, but
also to reflect their personality. In the SweatAtoms study,
participants specifically chose material filaments from the
given pool of material filaments to match their favourite
colour. Three participants wanted to change the filaments
colour everyday so that there are a distinctive feel and order to
the representation once assembled together. Looking into the

In literature, autonomy refers to the innate desire to take

ways in which users can participate in the design of material

actions out of personal volition and not under external

representations would be a useful research direction when

influence or control (Ryan and Deci 2009). According to Self-

moving forward with this work in the future. Designers,

Determination Theory (ibid) autonomy is experienced when a

therefore, should allow participants to customise their

user is given the freedom and scope to vary the activity within

experience by letting the participants freely choose what,

its set boundary. However, existing interactive systems built to

information needs to be printed, and when to print this

support physical activity put more emphasis on doing the

information. Additionally, there might also exist an opportunity

physical activity correctly and leave no room for improvisation

for designers to combine physical activity data from

or physical creativity. For example, most exercise-based digital

multiple people in order to represent this collected

systems like Dance Central18 replicate a real world scenario by

information as one combined object. Designers should

creating a virtual instructor where the user simply mimics the

therefore allow users to choose their own time period to both

steps being explained (Segura et al. 2013). I believe that the

exercise, and to print, artefacts. Designers need to be able to

aesthetics of material representations provide users with

make visible changes in the design and printing process in

opportunities to be self-expressive and autonomous.

response to user’s actions.

Additionally, any material representation, if put on display,
becomes the public representation of the self and
craftsmanship (Goffman 1959). As a result, in order to fabricate
different self-expressive material representations, the user
might feel inspired to try out new forms of physical activity.
Allowing Autonomy in data representation and the design of
material representations can make the artefacts more
meaningful to the user. This is because it enforces the feeling
of creativity in a way that allows users to feel as though they
have created the artefact. To this end, facilitating ways to
influence the design becomes important to support the
Autonomy.
In all three case studies, I found that participants often altered
their pattern of exercise, or increased the amount of physical
activity they used to do in order to get a bigger Frog, a smiling
Emoji, a rich flavoured drink, or to achieve a different shaped
Graph compared to previous days. In the TastyBeats study,
participants liked how a drink became a celebration of their
physical activity along with an opportunity to express
themselves in front of a large cheering crowd. As such, the
fluidic spectacle of heart rate becomes a public display of self,
allowing the participants to be imaginative and creative with
their movements.
Although I did not include participants in the design process,
most participants in both studies were vocal and enthusiastic
about designing representations for themselves. Participants
also altered the ways in which they printed and used their

18

http://www.dancecentral.com/

Figure 58 shows all 16 design cards at a glance.

Page 120 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Page 121 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Figure 58: All 16 cards of Shelfie.

Page 122 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Using Shelfie
The framework can be used to brainstorm within a group as
well as to work individually. Although, these cards can be
deployed and used in flexible manner, I encourage using these
cards in a spread out design based on Lego bricks, especially
when working in a group setting.
The intention behind spreading the design cards on Lego
board is to make the ideation phase quick and more visible.
With traditional design cards, the cards remain mostly hidden
throughout the process once a designer has made their choice.
For example, a designer draws a card from a deck, uses it in
some way to inform their ideation process and then returns
the card to the deck. In Shelfie framework, however, I instead
opt for a visual and spread-out display of cards on the Lego
board, where the used cards are visible and quickly accessible

Figure 59: Setting up Shelfie.

at all times. Such an arrangement of cards is partially inspired
by a popular board game Guess Who?19 . Allowing all of the
cards to be visible in this way also allows the designer to
easily view a summary of the chosen design concepts, allowing
them to have a broad overview of the design throughout the

Designers can work their way through each of the categories,
picking out and combining different cards to formulate their
design.

ideation process. Viewing the overall design concepts in this

On the Lego board, each design card is arranged between 4-6

way also allows designers to quickly change their mind about

Lego bricks with two Lego bricks in front of the design card

certain design themes and to move them around until their

and the remaining bricks behind the cards. The Lego bricks

desired design concept is realised.

bear the same colour and label as the category of the design

Spatial arrangement of Shelfie

themes. These Lego bricks bear the same label as the design
card theme. During the ideation phase, designers can pick one

The cards are spatially arranged on a Lego board of size 38cm

Lego brick from the back of the design card and place it

by 38cm in a 4x4 matrix (See Figure 57). The 4 rows denote

outside of the Lego board - if they decide to use that design

the four categories of the framework, where each row consists

theme in their design. As such, the collection of Lego bricks at

of four columns corresponding to the 4 design themes of the

a specific point of time describes the set of design themes that

category. The design cards in each row are arranged in the

the designer wants to consider in their design.

order of their importance, from first to last. These cards are
numbered to suggest one possible order of using them.

The setup and working is explained using the following steps.

However, this order is not mandatory to follow.
Figure 60: Shelfie setup

19http://www.hasbro.com/en-us/product/guess-who-game:8EFEF4A8-6D40-1014-8BF0-9EFBF894F9D4

Page 123 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

Setup

a final set of design themes that they wish to use in the

Materials needed: printed design cards, Lego bricks, and n+1

material artefact to be designed.

Lego flat sheet with ‘n’ being the number of participants.

There could be other possible ways to use the framework. For

Step 1: Print all the cards individually, each card should be

example, in a group, each participant first works individually

approximately 64mm x 100mm in size.

on each design theme and selects the Lego bricks

Step 2: Arrange the cards according to the category names.

in the final artefact. At the end, participants could have a

corresponding to the design themes they would prefer to have

Step 3: Arrange a set of 4-6 Lego bricks in 4 colours, each set

discussion on what design themes everyone has selected and

signifying one category of design themes. However, this

work out the final design.

number will change depending upon the number of

Summary

participants. If possible, try to match the colour of these Lego
bricks with the category colour for symmetry (refer Figure 59).

In this chapter I described a design framework Shelfie that

Step 4: Label the Lego bricks with the name of the design

material representations of physical activity data. I took an

theme.

aims to help further explorations in the context of designing
iterative approach to design the framework where the form

Step 5: Create a stack of Lego bricks for each design card. For

and design of the framework evolved through several focus

example, a stack of 3 Lego bricks to place at the back of the

group discussions organised with HCI experts, designers and IT

card and two in the front.

professionals. One of the initial design included 18 design

Step 6: Place the design cards on the Lego sheet in a 4 x 4
matrix. Follow the numbering on the cards to arrange them
across different rows such that the first row starts with the
number ‘1’ card and ends with the number ‘4’ card. Continue
laying out the cards in this way for the other three rows.

concepts across two broad categories describe as consumption
lens and production lens. I conducted focus group evaluations
of the framework to investigate its overall utility. The obtained
feedback guided me to design a prescriptive and easy to use
framework. The final design of Shelfie involves 16 design cards
that illustrate key design themes that designers should

Step 7: Now place the stack of Lego bricks in front and at the

consider while designing for the given context. I organised

back of each design card. The final arrangement will look like

multiple focus groups to refine the design cards in terms of its

the one shown in Figure 60.

design and content.

Step 8: Give one Lego board, called the Selection Board, to

The framework has helped in the ideation of the design of

each participant for ideation.

sports souvenirs, Fantibles (Khot et al. 2016). Fantibles is a

Working
Step 1: Place the Shelfie framework in the centre of the
ideation space (e.g., table) and ensure that each participant
has one selection board.
Step 2: Start with the first card of the first category, i.e.,
Purpose from the Mapping category. The first participant may
read out the card. Every participant thinks about the relevance
of the design theme to the design task at hand. If the design
theme is relevant, each participant moves one Lego brick to
their selection board. Participants can also use a Notepad to
note down some use cases, or to sketch some ideas Refer
Figure 61).
Step 3: Participants similarly continue with the next card, and
move one Lego brick to their selection board, if they care to
use the given theme in their design.
Step 4: Once all the cards are considered, participants then
discuss each content of each selection board. They should
discuss about what themes each participant has considered on
their selection board and why. Finally, participants then create

personalised sports memorabilia that highlights an individual’s
commentary about sports on Twitter along with the
uniqueness of each sports match (Refer Figure 62).
Table 6 shows how the Shelfie cards helped in shaping the
design of Fantibles.
Figure 61: Using Shelfie during ideation.

Page 124 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

PROPERTY

DESCRIPTION

1

Purpose

To make home-viewing pleasurable through tangible souvenirs.

2

Framing

Inclusion of both positive and negative memories of the match but in an abstract manner.

Personalisation

Use of team jersey’s colour to match the printed souvenir, focus on individual’s tweet along with

3
4
5

sports data.
Timing

Printing and delivery of the souvenirs after the match.

Newness

Use of generative design based on the individual’s tweets and sports data, which change with every
match.

6

Readability

Distribution of information across multiple artefacts that interlock with each other.

7

Utility

User defined but primarily as a sports memorabilia.

8

Pairing

With magnets so that Fantibles can be placed on the fridge door.

9

Lifetime

Focus on durability hence use of plastic.

10

Frequency

User defined and one per match.

11

Necessity

None.

12

Multisensory

Focus on tangibility.

13

Involvement

Not considered.

14

Visibility

Not considered.

15

Duration

Not considered.

16

Autonomy

Freedom to choose when to print and visible changes in the design in response to tweets.

In future, I aim to explore its utility in different contexts
through design workshops. With this framework, I aim to invite

Table 6: Use of Shelfie cards in the design of
Fantibles

designers and researchers - both in academia and industry
alike - to challenge their preconceived notion of representing
physical activity data to users. As technology evolves, it is
important that we as designers harness and explore the
exciting opportunities that these technologies offer. In my
work, I worked with the vision that in future, every home will
have some sort of personal fabrication devices - a food printer
or 3D printer. Therefore, there should be any limitation to
imagining possible design future. To this end, I would argue
that the proposed design framework not only marks the first
conceptualised approach to the design, but also paves the way
for future explorations of this work.

Figure 62: Fantibles

Page 125 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

#8
Conclusion

Page 126 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

CHAPTER 8

Conclusion
This chapter offers concluding remarks on the entire thesis and suggests future research directions.

Introduction
The main research topic investigated in this thesis was how to design material
representations of physical activity data that can positively affect the experience of
being physically active. In particular, I designed three prototypes that explore different
aspects of material representations and tried to accumulate knowledge through in the
“"If the doors of perception were
cleansed every thing would appear to
man as it is, infinite. For man has
closed himself up, till he sees all
things through narrow chinks of his
cavern."
— William Blake

wild field deployments. I used the study findings to map an emerging design space for
enduring and evocative use of physical activity data. The aim of this work was not to
pinpoint problems and issues in the existing works, rather it was to offer and explore
opportunities associated with a relatively under explored area of material
representations. This work does not stand against the existing approaches, instead
complements them by offering an alternate means of engagement with one’s own data.
To this end, I speculate and orchestrate design opportunities and challenges for making
data memorable (through SweatAtoms), enjoyable (through TastyBeats) and fulfilling
(through EdiPulse).

Research objectives revisited
In the introduction I outlined four research objectives that I aimed to address in my
work. Here, I articulate how I addressed these objectives:

Objective 1: Gather an understanding of the existing literature
To meet the first objective, I examined the existing approaches to represent physical
activity data and discovered an inclination towards using the screen as a communication
medium. I deduced that this is most likely because screens are readily available. In
contrast, explorations of using other mediums, such as physical and tangible
representations of physical activity, have been relatively sparse. I found that the
meaningfulness of data representation has a major impact on engagement and user’s
behaviour (Hansel et al. 2016 p.1). A poor representation or overload of information can
create confusion and discouragement among users (ibid). Although existing methods of
data representations are quite successful in increasing awareness about physical
activity, their focus has mainly been on quantification and rational self-analysis. Through
the use of material representations that involve more than just the visual sense, I put
forward a case to look into alternate ways of engaging with one’s own physical activity
data.

Objective 2: Explore the design space of material representations
To meet the second objective, I looked into existing literature on material culture and
physical visualisations, to identify opportunities and strategies for creating material
representations of physical activity data. I identified four key aspects, namely, mapping,
material, process and outcome that needs attention while designing material
representations.

Page 127 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

I also found two opportunities with material representations

In all the three studies, participants were recruited following a

that can complement existing approaches: 1) Using durable

snowball sampling method. As a result, they may not be true

materials such as plastic to represent data, 2) Using

representative sample of the population. Moreover, each of the

consumable materials such as food for data representation. I

presented systems has been studied with a small sample for a

explored these opportunities using three materials, namely,

duration of 2 weeks. Longer trials of the systems would have

plastic, fluids, and chocolate.

raised other important issues in terms of sustainability and

Objective 3: Validate the design space
The third objective was met by designing, prototyping and
testing three working systems - SweatAtoms, TastyBeats, and
EdiPulse. These systems translate physical activity data into
material, fluid and edible forms by respectively using plastic,
drinkable fluids, and chocolate as materials. I conducted field
studies of each of the three systems, where the system was
deployed in different households for a period of two weeks
and participants interacted with the system on a daily basis.
Results of the field studies provide empirical evidence of
engagement and rekindled interest in physical activity for my
participants. Plastic allowed material representations to
become long lasting and thus became a tangible souvenir for
invested effort in physical activity. Drinkable fluids and
chocolate made material representations enjoyable and
satisfying, and suggested ways of supporting the body’s need
to replenish lost fluids and energy from physical activity. The
interactive water fountains used in TastyBeats also offered a
visual vista of seeing one’s physical activity in fluid form

long-term engagement with one’s own artefacts. For instance,
what would one do with the 450 plastic artefacts generated by
the SweatAtoms system over a three-month trial? Would the
novelty of individually mixed sports drinks or chocolate treats
– pale over that kind of time period? Would it give rise to
rebellion and rejection as commonly observed in the use of
wearable tracking devices? These are all valid questions and
need to be addressed through long term deployments.
Nevertheless, given the lengthy time frame necessary to
achieve health benefits as a result of physical activity it is
often difficult to judge the efficacy of short design-led study
interventions (Klasnja et al. 2011, Purpura et al. 2011). Instead,
it has been suggested that such studies should be judged
based on: a) their impact on ongoing practices, b) how they
bring about changes in people’s attitudes rather than changes
in their behaviour, c) how they foster mindfulness, and d)
create room for stories. The field study of three systems
illustrated both ‘real’ and ‘useful’ responses from a diverse
sample of participants and provides important markers into

performed in front of them.

their attitudes and behaviour towards physical activity. I also

Objective 4: Create and validate a design framework

amongst participants with several commenting on how the

received anecdotal evidence of increased physical activity

To address the fourth objective, I used the study findings to

system helped them to become more active, build a routine

derive a design framework called Shelfie. The framework offers

and enjoy a more active life. Due to the prevalence of

design guidelines for creating material representations of

biofeedback tools such as like heart rate monitors and

physical activity data. The framework is realised in the form of

pedometers among youths (Swan et al. 2012), I believe the

16 design cards. Each card describes an important design

research outcomes will be able to be applied more broadly.

consideration, formulated from the study findings and relevant
literature on the topic. Through this framework, I believe I
present the first conceptual understanding of the relationship
between material representations and physical activity data
that I also believe will help designers in the design of material

Future Work
Through investigating the topic of material representations of
physical activity I mainly focused on specific examples to help
guide my research and allow me to answer my primary

representations.

research question. This narrow focus often left me wondering

Limitations

could be further investigated. I consider such investigations to

about additional explorations and ways in which the work

All three systems discussed in this research are designed with

be future work and suggest here how I plan to investigate this

predefined algorithms that measure heart rate and translate

topic further.

this data into some material form. This designer-oriented view
may limit or may not fully support the autonomy in creating
the material representations. Therefore, in future work, I am
planning to structure these systems as a creative framework
that will allow the users to take up the designer’s role and
express their creativity with interesting designs.

Using our interaction with food for social reflection
Human Food Interaction (HFI) (Comber et al. 2013) is an
emerging field of research within the HCI community. HFI
focuses on understanding established food practices such as
how we grow, cook and eat food and how these practices
relate back to our health and social identity. However, the use
of food for purposes other than the established practices has

Page 128 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

been narrow, which I consider as a missed opportunity. Food, I

counterparts, material artefacts are more readily available and

believe, is an under-explored reservoir of exciting interaction

publicly visible in the surroundings. As a result, it would be

and engagement opportunities offering multi-sensory

interesting to investigate user’s engagement over time, looking

experiences comprising of touch, taste and smell. Following

at how the portrayed representation of personal data can

Rooksby et al. (2014), I believe that there is a need to gain a

sustain itself over time. There still remain questions on

deeper and systematic understanding of the socio-technical

environmental sustainability and food wastage. An interesting

practices at play in order to optimise the opportunities at our

research direction to solve this question would be to look into

disposal. As a starting point, I am interested in understanding

dynamic material representations that augment themselves

food as a design resource for the purposes of communicating

over time. For example, using shape-changing interfaces

personal data and nurturing social interactions. Earlier works

(Rasmussen et al. 2011) we can update the shape of an

by Grimes et al. (2009) highlight the importance of family-

artefact in accordance with the changes on the personal data.

based reflection. Supporting this, designers could utilise meal

Another interesting area of study would be to investigate how

and snack times as opportunities for families to notice

people would repurpose these artefacts after a long period of

changes in each other’s health routine and make suggestions

possession, and how they would dispose of these material

for improvement and change. Such edible displays of data,

representations when no longer needed or wanted.

could allow the conversation to be more in person rather than
through an electronic medium. Therefore, designing playful
technologies around food could be an interesting area to
explore for fostering and strengthening family bonding

Validating the framework
In this thesis, I presented a design framework Shelfie that
aimed at helping the designer in the design of material

through food.

representations. Therefore, the next logical step in this regard

Personal Informatics in public and home space

cases in different contexts. I am planning to evaluate this

would be to validate the framework further to identify its use

Self-monitoring devices collect different aspects of our life and

framework by organising workshops targeted at design

provide us with opportunities to monitor and contemplate on

researchers in order to demonstrate the frameworks utility in

our behaviour. While the term “self” in self-monitoring refers

practice. I will invite participants to an ideation workshop

to the individual, there can be benefits of engaging others in

where they will use this framework to come up with design

the process of self-monitoring through social and collaborative

ideas for a given design task centred around new ways of

means (Rooksby et al. 2014). Many such devices already allow

visualising physical activity data in material form.

sharing and comparison of the tracked data with other users.
However, this sharing happens over the Internet and little is
shared between the people who are co-located (who share the
same physical space). However, this research has identified
different benefits of making this data public such as
encouraging self-expression, creating a shared understanding
of data and enjoyment through celebrating each others
achievements. Taking this work forward, I propose designing
personal informatics in public space that transcend data
representations from personal space, such as a mobile screen,
to a shared public space such as streets. However, designing
for a public social space will require consideration about the
overall reception and privacy of the data. Abstract forms of
data representation as explored in this thesis could be a way

Improving digital fabrication processes
Although I have used a commercially available 3D printer and
food printer in my studies, I had to update and modify it
significantly to make it work in accordance with my project
goals. I improved the extrusion method by exploring an open
source printing software, different materials, and 3D models. In
the case of EdiPulse, I also experimented with different kinds
of chocolates to see which type would print better under
varying temperature conditions. Additionally, the study
participants were not experts in 3D printing and I had to
simplify various steps so that the novice users could use the
systems easily at home. As such, this work offers a technical
contribution that simplifies 3D and food printing for non-

towards tackling these issues.

expert use and situates its use within the context of physical

Creating sustainable material representations

and discuss the 3D or food printing process in general — rather

activity. Since the main motive of the work was not to present

Material artefacts have a longer life and a sustained value in

to use them as a medium to represent physical activity data —

people’s life than its digital counterparts as identified by

I focused in this research mainly on the study insights. I point

previous literature (Petrelli et al. 2008; Golsteijn et al. 2012;

interested readers to exciting works by Mueller et al. (2014) on

Kirk and Sellen 2010). Additionally, unlike their digital

Page 129 | Rohit Ashok Khot | Understanding Material Representations of Physical Activity.

improving 3D printing in general and to the 3Digital cooks

only as an “anchor” to facilitate the change. Deci aptly said in

website , which is devoted to food printing experimentations.

his TED talk (2012), “Don’t ask how we can motivate people.

20

Final words

That’s the wrong question. Ask how we can provide the conditions
within which people can motivate themselves”. I also quote Fogg

Self-monitoring is a persuasive and powerful tool for reflection

(2013), who said, “plant a seed in the right spot and it will grow

and increasing awareness of the self. However, state of the art

without coaxing”. Supporting this notion, I encourage designers

technology still requires a lot of effort, engagement and

to influence the inner abilities of an individual through their

knowledge to interpret the collected data. As a result, despite

design in order to nurture a behavioural change.

the technological improvements and popularity, ensuring longterm user engagement with these devices is still a major
challenge (Hansel et al. 2016). For example, Velayanikal (2014)
reports a dropout rate of nearly 85% for such devices. Creating
new tools and investigating representation strategies could
assist in getting past these hurdles and in that way could also
provide an active support for self-improvement. The use of
different physical materials to represent self-tracking data can
create new possibilities and challenges for HCI researchers to
push the field forward. In this thesis, I initiated discussion on
how material representations can influence the self-tracking
practice and, in turn, how the self-tracking practice can
contribute to the field of material representations. It is also
possible that there are other ways in which multi-sensory
media can support the physical activity experience and I invite
future explorations in this avenue.

For this thesis, I also worked with the vision that in 5 or 10
years time, 3D printing and food printing devices would be
commonly found in our homes. At the moment little is known
on how and for what purpose people would make use of these
exciting new technologies. By contextualising their use in the
domain of physical activity and self-monitoring technologies,
this research opens up an exciting new design space for
researchers and interaction designers to take this field forward.
For example, I see the potential for food printing to become an
important determinant criterion of future meals and dining
experiences. Food printers could provide us with nutrition
customised on the macro level, allowing the right level of
mapping between the amounts of protein, carbohydrates, and
fats in meals for individual consumption. I therefore encourage
design researchers to use these technologies, not just to
continue to make representations of data we are used to, but

According to Fogg (2013), motivation alone may not be enough

to bring to light invisible and internal bodily data (such as

to sustain long-term behavioural change. Rooksby et al. (2015),

heart rate) and explore the novel opportunities that exist in

argue that individual’s relationship with their data goes

displaying such information in material forms. I hope my work

beyond persuasion as well as rational self-analysis, rather it

will provoke thinking in this direction and encourages

ventures into the topics of “how these devices are lived and

advancement in the area of displaying physical activity with

experienced”. Therefore, rather than focusing on motivation

material representations. In doing so, I look forward to

alone, designers should allow for the natural processes to

exploring and witnessing new ways of connecting the

emerge from the data and use the data and its representation
.

biographies of the material world with the immaterial world.

20

http://www.3digitalcooks.com

REFERENCES

1.

American College of Sports Medicine. 2013. ACSM's
guidelines for exercise testing and prescription.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

2.

Ananthanarayan, S, Siek, K and Eisenberg, M 2016. A Craft
Approach to Health Awareness in Children. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS '16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
724-735. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2901790.2901888

3.

Ancker, JS and Kaufman, D 2007. Rethinking health
numeracy: A multidisciplinary literature review. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association, 14(6), pp.
713-721.

4.

Anderson, C 2010. The new industrial revolution. Wired
magazine, 18, 2.

5.

Anderson, I, Maitland, J, Sherwood, S, Barkhuus, L,
Chalmers, M, Hall, M, Brown, B and Muller, H 2007. Shakra:
Tracking and Sharing Daily Activity Levels with
Unaugmented Mobile Phones. Mobile Networks and
Applications 12, 2-3 (2007), 185–199. DOI:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11036-007-0011-7.

6.

Antle, AN, Droumeva, M and Ha, D 2009. Hands on what?:
comparing children's mouse-based and tangible-based
interaction. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC '09).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 80-88. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/1551788.1551803.

7.

Archer, B 1995, The Nature of Research, Co-design,
interdisciplinary journal of design, January 1995: 6-13.

8.

Ashby, M and Johnson, K 2010. Materials and Design. The
Art and Science of Material Selection in Product Design.
Elsevier.

9.

Azzawi, AA 2014, Theories of Experience. In Experience
with Technology: Dynamics of User Experience with
Mobile Media Devices, Springer, 2014.

10. Bekker, T and Antle, AN 2011, Developmentally situated
design (DSD): making theoretical knowledge accessible
to designers of children's technology. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (pp. 2531-2540). ACM.
11. Benson, R and Connolly, D 2011 Heart rate training,
Human Kinetics.
12. Bentley, F, Tollmar, K, Stephenson, P, Levy, L, Jones, B,
Robertson, S, Price, E, Catrambone, R and Wilson, J 2013.
Health Mashups: Presenting statistical patterns between
wellbeing data and context in natural language to
promote behavior change. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 20(5), p.30.
13. Berkovsky, S, Coombe, M, Freyne, J, Bhandari, D and
Baghaei, N 2010. Physical activity motivating games:
virtual rewards for real activity. In Proc. CHI’10. ACM,
243-252.

14. Berry, TR and Latimer-Cheung, A 2013, Overcoming
challenges to build stronger physical activity promotion
messages. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine, 7 (6),
371 - 378.
15. Bickmore, T, Mauer, D, Crespo, F and Brown, T 2008.
Negotiating Task Interruptions with Virtual Agents for
Health Behavior Change. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems - Volume 3 (AAMAS ’08).
International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC, 1241–1244. http://
dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1402821.1402841
16. Biddle, S and Mutrie, N 2008, Psychology of physical
activity: determinants, well-being, and interventions.
Routledge, London.
17.

Biernacki, P and Waldorf, D 1981. Snowball sampling:
Problems and techniques of chain referral sampling.
Sociological methods & research, 10(2), pp.141-163.

18. Blandford, A, Furniss, D and Makri, S 2016, Qualitative
HCI Research. Going Behind the Scenes. Synthesis
Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics.
19. Bloch, M 2008, Truth and sight: Generalizing without
universalizing. J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst, 14, p.22-32.
Bluetooth, http://www.bluetooth.com/Pages/BluetoothHome.aspx, Last accessed July 2014.
20. Blythe, M, Briggs, J, Olivier, P and Hook, J 2012, Digital
originals: reproduction as a space for design. In
Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on HumanComputer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design(pp.
1-20). ACM.
21. Braun, V and Clarke, V 2006, Using thematic analysis in
psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2),
77-101.
22. Bravata, MS, Smith-Spangler, C, Sundaram, V, Gienger, AL,
Lin, N, Lewis, R, Stave, CD, Olkin, I and Sirard, J 2007,
Using Pedometers to Increase Physical Activity and
Improve Health: A Systematic Review. JAMA, 298(19), pp.
2296-2304.
23. Brillat-Savarin, JA 1835, Physiologie du Goût [The
Philosopher in the Kitchen / The Physiology of Taste];
1835. Translated by A. Lalauze: A Handbook of
Gastronomy. London: Nimmo and Bain; 1884.
24. Brown, JD 1998, The Self. McGraw-Hill.
25. Brown, B, Reeves, S and Sherwood, S 2011. Into the wild:
challenges and opportunities for field trial methods. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1657-1666. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/1978942.1979185
26. Brynjarsdottir, H, Håkansson, M, Pierce, J, Baumer, E,
DiSalvo, C and Sengers P 2012. Sustainably unpersuaded:
how persuasion narrows our vision of sustainability. In

Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
947-956. DOI=10.1145/2207676.2208539 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2208539
27.

Buechley, L and Perner-Wilson, H 2013, Crafting
Technology: Reimagining the Processes, Materials, and
Cultures of Electronics. Journal ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (ToCHI).

28. Byrne, D and Jones, GJF 2009, Exploring narrative
presentation for large multimodal lifelog collections
through card sorting. In Proc. Conference on Interactive
Digital Storytelling: Interactive Storytelling, pp. 92-97.
29. Cabanac M 2009, The dialectics of pleasure. In
Kringelbach & Berridge (eds.), Pleasures of the brain (pp.
113-124). Oxford University Press.
30. Candy, L and Hori, K 2003, The digital muse: HCI in
support of creativity: creativity and cognition comes of
age: towards a new discipline, Interactions, 10 (4), 44-54.
31. Card, S, Mackinlay, J and Schneiderman, B 1999, Readings
in information visualisation. San Francisco: Kaufmann.
32. Chamberlain, A, Crabtree, A, Rodden, T, Jones, M and
Rogers, Y 2012. Research in the wild: understanding 'in
the wild' approaches to design and development. In
Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 795-796.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2318078
33. Chang, K, Liu, S, Chu, H, Hsu, JY, Chen, C, Lin, T, Chen, C and
Huang, P 2006. The diet-aware dining table: observing
dietary behaviors over a tabletop surface. In Proceedings
of the 4th international conference on Pervasive
Computing (PERVASIVE'06), Springer-Verlag, pp.366-382.
DOI=10.1007/11748625_23 http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/11748625_23.
34. Charmaz, K 2006, Constructing grounded theory: A
practical guide through qualitative research.
SagePublications Ltd, London.
35. Choe, EK, Lee, NB, Lee, B, Pratt, W and Kientz, JA 2014,
Understanding quantified-selfers' practices in collecting
and exploring personal data. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1143–1152.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372
36. Choe, EK, Lee, B and Schraefel, MC 2015, Characterizing
Visualization Insights from Quantified Selfers' Personal
Data Presentations, in Computer Graphics and
Applications, IEEE , vol.35, no.4, pp.28-37, July-Aug. 2015.
doi: 10.1109/MCG.2015.51.
37.

Ciminero, AR, Calhoun, KS and Adams, HE (Eds.) 1986,
Handbook of behavioral assessment (2nd edition). New
York: Wiley-Interscience.

38. Clawson, J, Pater, JA, Miller, AD, Mynatt, ED and Mamykina,
L 2015, No longer wearing: investigating the
abandonment of personal health-tracking technologies
on craigslist. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp '15). ACM, 647-658.
DOI=10.1145/2750858.2807554 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2750858.2807554.

39. Cialdini, RB 2006. Influence: The Psychology of
Persuasion (2nd ed.). Harper Business, New York, USA.
40. Cialdini, RB and Goldstein, NJ 2004. Social influence:
Compliance and conformity. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 55, pp.
591-621.
41. Coelho, M 2005, DinnerWare: why playing with food
should be encouraged. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Posters
(SIGGRAPH'05), ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 16.
DOI=10.1145/1186954.1186972 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/1186954.1186972.
42. Coelho, M, Poupyrev, I, Sadi, S, Vertegaal, R, Berzowska, J,
Buechley, L 2009, Programming reality: from transitive
materials to organic user interfaces. Workshop Session at
the 27th international conference on Human factors in
computing systems (CHI '09). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
4759- 4762.
43. Colley RC, Garriguet D, Janssen I, Craig CL, Clarke J,
Tremblay MS 2011, Physical activity of Canadian adults:
accelerometer results from the 2007 to 2009 Canadian
health measures survey. Health Rep 22(1), pp.1–8.
44. Comber, R, Choi, JH, Hoonhout, J and O'hara, K 2014,
Editorial: Designing for human-food interaction: An
introduction to the special issue on 'food and interaction
design'. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 72, 2 (February 2014),
pp.181-184. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.
2013.09.001
45. Comber, R, Ganglbauer, E, Choi, JH, Hoonhout, J, Rogers, Y,
O'Hara, K and Maitland, J 2012, Food and interaction
design: designing for food in everyday life. In CHI '12
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '12). ACM, pp. 2767-2770.
DOI=10.1145/2212776.2212716 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2212776.2212716.
46. Comber, R, Hoonhout, J, van Halteren, A, Moynihan, P,
Olivier, P 2013, Food practices as situated action. In Proc.
CHI ’13, ACM, pp. 2457-2466.
47.

Consolvo, S, Everitt, K, Smith, I and Landay, J 2006, Design
requirements for technologies that encourage physical
activity. In Proc. CHI’06, pp. 457-466.

48. Consolvo, S, Klasnja, P, McDonald, D, Avrahami, D,
Froehlich, J, Legrand, L, Libby, R, Mosher, K and Landay, J
2008a, Flowers or a robot army? Encouraging awareness
and activity with personal, mobile displays. In
Proceedings of UbiComp’08.
49. Consolvo, S, McDonald, D, Toscos, T, Chen, M, Froehlich, J,
Harrison, B, Klasnja, P, Lamarca, A, Legrand, L, Libby, R,
Smith, I and Landay, J 2008b, Activity sensing in the wild:
A field trial of ubifit garden. In Proceedings of CHI’08.
50. Consolvo, S, McDonald, DW and Landay, J 2009, Theorydriven design strategies for technologies that support
behavior change in everyday life. In Proc. CHI’09, pp.
405-414.
51. Connelly, KH, Faber, AM, Rogers, Y, Siek, KA & Toscos, T
2006, Mobile applications that empower people to
monitor their personal health. E & I Elektrotechnik und
Informationstechnik 123 (4), Springer-Verlag, pp. 124–
128.

52. Crawford, MB 2009, Shop Class as Soulcraft: An Inquiry
Into the Value of Work 1st Ed. Penguin Press, New York,
NY.
53. Creswell, JW 2003, Chapter 1: A framework for design, in
Research design: qualitative, quantitative and mixed
methods. Sage Publications.
54. Cross, N 2006, Designerly Ways of Knowing. SpringerVerlag, London.
55. Curmi, F, Ferrario, MA, Southern, J and Whittle, J 2013,
HeartLink: open broadcast of live biometric data to social
networks. In Proc. CHI '13. ACM Press, pp.1749-1758.
56. Deci, EL 2012, Promoting Motivation, Health, and
Excellence. http://tedxtalks.ted.com/video.mason/
Promoting- Motivation- Health- and?, TEDxFlourCity.
(2012). Accessed: 12.05.2015.
57.

Dant, T 1999, Material culture in the social world: values,
activities, lifestyles. Open University Press.

58. Davis, WD 2005. The interactive effects of goal
orientation and feedback specificity on task performance.
Human Performance, 18(4), pp.409-426.
59. Delwiche, JF 2012, You eat with your eyes first. Physiol.
Behavior. 107:502-504.
60. Deng, Y, Antle, AN and Neustaedter, C 2014. Tango cards:
a card-based design tool for informing the design of
tangible learning games. In Proceedings of the 2014
conference on Designing interactive systems (DIS '14).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 695-704. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2598510.2598601.
61. Deslandes, A, Moraes, H, Ferreira, C, Veiga, H, Silveira, H,
Mouta, R, Pompeu, FA, Coutinho, ESF and Laks, J 2009.
Exercise and mental health: many reasons to move.
Neuropsychobiology, 59(4), pp.191-198.
62. Desmet, P 2003. Measuring emotion: Development and
application of an instrument to measure emotional
responses to products. In Funology (pp. 111-123).
Springer Netherlands.
63. Deterding, S 2012, Gamification: Designing for
Motivation in: Interactions, 19, 4, pp.14-17.
64. Dietz, P, Reyes, G and Kim, D 2014, The PumpSpark
fountain development kit. In Proc. DIS '14, ACM, pp.
259-266.
65. Dinnin, A 2009. The appeal of our new stuff: How
newness creates value. Advances in Consumer Research,
36, 261–265.
66. DiSalvo, B and Roshan, PK 2014. Medium probes:
exploring the medium not the message. In Proceedings
of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems
(DIS '14). ACM, 239-248. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2598510.2598580
67.

Döring, T 2016. The Interaction Material Profile:
Understanding and Inspiring How Physical Materials
Shape Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI EA '16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2446-2453. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2851581.2892516.

68. Dragicevic, P and Jansen, Y 2012, List of physical
visualizations. dataphys.org/list.
69. Dumas, A 1958. Dictionary of cuisine. Simon and Schuster.
70. Dunne, A and Raby, F 2001, Design noir: The secret life of
electronic objects, August Media. 64
71. Duvivier, BM, Schaper, NC, Bremers, MA, Van Crombrugge,
G, Menheere, PP, Kars, M and Savelberg, HH 2013,
Minimal Intensity Physical Activity (Standing and
Walking) of Longer Duration Improves Insulin Action and
Plasma Lipids More than Shorter Periods of Moderate to
Vigorous Exercise (Cycling) in Sedentary Subjects When
Energy Expenditure Is Comparable. PloS one, 8, Public
Library of Science.
72. Edwards, J, Harvey, P and Wade, P 2010 Technologized
Images, Technologized Bodies. In Technologized Images,
Technologized Bodies; Berghahn Books, pp. 1–35.
73. Elmqvist, N 2014, Visualization reloaded: redefining the
scientific agenda for visualization research. In
Proceedings of HCI Korea (HCIK '15). Hanbit Media, Inc.,
South Korea, pp.132-137.
74. Elsden, C, Kirk, DS and Durrant, AC 2015, A Quantified
Past: Towards Design for Remembering with Personal
Informatics. Human-Computer Interaction, DOI=
10.1080/07370024.2015.1093422
75. Epstein, DA, Cordeiro, F, Bales, E, Fogarty, J and Munson, S
2014, Taming data complexity in lifelogs: exploring
visual cuts of personal informatics data. In Proc. DIS '14,
ACM Press, pp. 667-676.
76. Fallman, D 2003, Design-oriented human-computer
interaction. InProceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems (pp. 225-232). ACM.
77.

Fan, C, Forlizzi, J and Dey, A 2012, A Spark Of Activity:
Exploring Information Art As Visualization For Physical
Activity. In Proc. Ubicomp ’12, ACM Press..

78. Fan JX, Brown BB, Zick CD, Kowaleski-Jones L, Smith KR
and Hanson H 2013, Moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity and weight outcomes: Does every minute count?
American Journal of Health Promotion. 28(1), pp. 41- 49.
79. Fletcher G., Balady G., Amsterdam E., et al. 2001, Exercise
standards for testing and training: a statement for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2001, 1694-1740.
80. Food grade mini water pump 2015, http://
www.lightobject.com/High-temperature100-39CDC-12V-185LMin-29GPH-mini-Water-Pump-Food- gradeP711.aspx.
81. Gauntlett, D 2013. Making is connecting. John Wiley &
Sons.
82. Ganglbauer, E, Fitzpatrick, G and Comber, R 2013.
Negotiating food waste: Using a practice lens to inform
design. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 20(2), p.11.
83. Fogg, BJ 2002, Persuasive Technology: Using computers
to change what we think and do. Ubiquity, December
Issue, Article 5 (Dec. 2002). DOI:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/764008.763957

84. Fogg, BJ 2013. Why Tiny Habits Give Big Results. SXSW
Talk. (2013).

99. Gaver, W 2012, What should we expect from research
through design? In Proc. CHI’12. ACM Press, pp. 937-946.

85. Fogtmann, M, Fritsch, J and Kortbek, K 2008, Kinesthetic
interaction: revealing the bodily potential in interaction
design. In Proc. OZCHI 2008, ACM Press, pp.89-96.

100. Gaver, W, Bowers, J, Boehner, K, Boucher, A, Cameron, D,
Hauenstein, M, Jarvis, N and Pennington, S 2013, Indoor
weather stations: investigating a ludic approach to
environmental HCI through batch prototyping. In Proc.
CHI '13, ACM, pp.3451-3460.

86. Forlizzi, J, Disalvo, C and Hanington, B 2003, On the
relationship between emotion, experience and the
design of new products. The Design Journal, 6(2), 29–38.
87.

Forlizzi, J and Battarbee, K 2004, Understanding
Experience in Interactive Systems. In Proc. DIS 2004,
p261-268.

88. Fortmann, J, Cobus, V, Heuten, W and Boll, S 2014.
WaterJewel: design and evaluation of a bracelet to
promote a better drinking behaviour. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM '14). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 58-67. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2677972.2677976.
89. Fox, S and Duggan, M 2012, Mobile Health 2012.
Retrieved June 28, 2014, from Pew Research Center’s
Internet: http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/
Reports/2012/PIP_Mobile Health2012.pdf
90. Fox, S and Duggan, M 2013, Tracking for Health.
Retrieved June 28, 2014, from Pew Research Center’s
Internet: http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/
Reports/2013/PIP_Tracking forHealth_PDF.pdf.
91. Frens, JW 2006. Designing for Rich Interaction:
Integrating Form, Interaction, and Function (2006).
ISBN-10: 90-9020538-1.
92. Fritz, T, Huang, EM, Murphy, GC, and Zimmermann, T 2014,
Persuasive technology in the real world: a study of longterm use of activity sensing devices for fitness. In Proc.
CHI '14, ACM Press, pp. 487-496.
93. Fuchsberger, V, Murer, M, Meneweger, T and Tscheligi, M
2014. Capturing the in-between of interactive artifacts
and users: a materiality-centered approach. In
Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on HumanComputer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational (NordiCHI
'14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 451-460. DOI=http://
dx.doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2639219.
94. Fukuchi, K, Jo, K, Tomiyama, A and Takao, S 2012, Laser
cooking: a novel culinary technique for dry heating using
a laser cutter and vision technology. In Proceedings of
the ACM multimedia 2012 workshop on Multimedia for
cooking and eating activities (CEA '12). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 55-58. DOI=10.1145/2390776.2390788 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2390776.2390788.
95. Galesic, M and Garcia-Retamero, R 2011, Graph literacy: A
crosscultural comparison. Medical Decision Making 31,
pp.444-457.
96. Gaver, B, Dunne, T and Pacenti, E 1999, Design: Cultural
probes. Interactions 6, 1, pp. 21-29.
97.

Gaver, B and Bowers, J 2012, Annotated portfolios.
Interactions, 19, 4, pp. 40-49.

98. Gaver, WW, Bowers, J, Boucher, A, Gellerson, H, Pennington,
S, Schmidt, A, Steed, A, Villars, N, and Walker, B. The drift
table: designing for ludic engagement. Ext. Abstracts CHI
’04, ACM Press (2004), 885-900.

101. Gaver, W, Michael, M, Kerridge, T, Wilkie, A, Boucher, A,
Ovalle, L and Plummer-Fernandez, M 2015, Energy
babble: Mixing environmentally-oriented internet
content to engage community groups. In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 1115-1124). ACM.
102. Gershenfeld, N 2007, Fab: The Coming Revolution on Your
Desktop–from Personal Computers to Personal
Fabrication. Basic Books.
103. Geurts, L and Vanden Abeele, V 2012, Splash controllers:
game controllers involving the uncareful manipulation of
water. In Proc. TEI ’12, ACM, pp.183-186.
104. Giaccardi, E and Karana, E 2015. Foundations of Materials
Experience: An Approach for HCI. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2447-2456. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2702123.2702337.
105. Gockley, R, Marotta, M, Rogoff, C and Tang, A 2006. AVIVA:
A Health and Fitness Monitor for Young Women. In CHI
’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1819–
1824. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125796
106. Goffman, E 1959, The Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life. Penguin Books.
107. Golsteijn, C, Hoven, E. van den, Frohlich, D and Sellen, A
2012, Towards a More Cherishable Digital Object. In Proc.
DIS'12, ACM Press, pp. 655-664.
108. Gonzalez, JA 1995, Autotopographies. In G. Brahm Jr. and
M. Driscoll, Eds. Prosthetic Territories. Politics and
Hypertechnologies, Westview Press. pp.133–150.
109. Greene C and Cramer, J 2011, Beyond mere sustenance:
Food as communication/Communication as food. Food as
Communication/Communication as Food, New York: Peter
Lang, pp. ix-xix.
110. Grimes, A and Harper, R 2008, Celebratory technology:
new directions for food research in HCI. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 467-476.
DOI=10.1145/1357054.1357130 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/1357054.1357130
111. Grimes, A, Tan, D and Morris, D 2009, Toward technologies
that support family reflections on health. In Proceedings
of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting
group work (GROUP '09). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
311-320. DOI=10.1145/1531674.1531721 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1531674.1531721
112. Grosse-Hering, B, Mason, J, Aliakseyeu, D, Bakker, C and
Desmet, P 2013, Slow design for meaningful interactions.
In Proc. CHI '13, ACM Press, pp. 3431-3440.

113. Haddadi, H, Mortier, R, McAuley, D and Crowcroft, J 2013.
Human-data interaction. University of Cambridge (2013).
114. Hekkert, P 2006. Design aesthetics: principles of pleasure
in design.Psychology science, 48(2), p.157.
115. Haller, M, Richter, C, Brandl, P, Gross, S, Schossleitner, G,
Schrempf, A, Nii, H, Sugimoto, M and Inami, M 2011,
Finding the right way for interrupting people improving
their sitting posture. In Proceedings of the 13th IFIP TC
13 international conference on Human-computer
interaction - Volume Part II (INTERACT'11), SpringerVerlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1- 17.
116. Hallnas̈ , L and Redström, J 2001, Slow Technology;
Designing for Reflection. Journal of Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing 5, 3, Springer-Verlag, pp. 201-212.
117. Halskov, K and Dalsgård, P 2006. Inspiration card
workshops. In Proceedings of the 6th conference on
Designing Interactive systems (DIS '06). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2-11. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/1142405.1142409
118. Ham, J and Midden, C 2010. Ambient Persuasive
Technology Needs Little Cognitive Effort: The Differential
Effects of Cognitive Load on Lighting Feedback Versus
Factual Feedback. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Persuasive Technology. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 132–142. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-13226-1 14
119. Hansel, K, Wilde, N, Haddadi, H. and Alomainy, A 2015.
Wearable Computing for Health and Fitness: Exploring
the Relationship between Data and Human Behaviour.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.05238.
120. Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, Powell KE, Blair SN, Franklin
BA, Macera CA, Heath GW, Thompson PD and Bauman A
2007, Physical activity and public health: updated
recommendation for adults from the American College of
Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 28;116(9), pp. 1081-1093.
121. Hassenzahl, M 2004, The interplay of beauty, goodness,
and usability in interactive products. Human-Computer
Interactions, 19, 319-349.
122. Hassenzahl, M and Tractinsky, N 2006. User experience-a
research agenda. In Behaviour & Information Technology,
25:2, 91-97.
123. Hassenzahl, M, Eckold, K, Diefenbach, S, Laschke, M, Len, E
and Kim, J 2013, Designing moments of meaning and
pleasure. Experience design and happiness. International
Journal of Design, 7(3), 21-31.
124. Hassenzahl, M and Laschke M. 2015. Pleasurable
Troublemakers. In S. Walz and S. Deterding, eds., The
Gameful World: Approaches, Issues, Applications, pp.
167-195.
125. Hassenzahl, M, Laschke M and Praest, J. 2016. On the
stories activity trackers tell. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct (UbiComp '16). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 582-587. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2968219.2968325.

126. Havighurst, RJ and Glasser, R 1972, An exploratory study
of reminiscence. J. Gerontology, 27(2), pp. 245-253.
HealthKit 2015, https://developer.apple.com/healthkit/
127. Hekler, EB, Klasnja, P, Froehlich, JE and Buman. MP 2013,
Mind the theoretical gap: interpreting, using, and
developing behavioral theory in HCI research. In Proc.
CHI '13, ACM Press, pp. 3307-3316.
128. Henderson, LW, Knight, T and Richardson, B 2013, An
exploration of the well-being benefits of hedonic and
eudaimonic behaviour The Journal of Positive Psychology.
Vol. 8, Iss. 4, pp. 322–336.
129. Hermsen, S, Frost, J, Renes, RJ and Kerkhof, P 2016. Using
feedback through digital technology to disrupt and
change habitual behavior: A critical review of current
literature. Computers in Human Behavior, 57, pp.61-74.
130. Holman, D and Vertegaal, R 2008, Organic user interfaces:
designing computers in any way, shape, or form,
Communications, ACM 51, 6 (June 2008), 48 – 55.
131. Hong, J, Song, S, Cho, J and Bianchi, A 2015, Better Posture
Awareness through Flower-Shaped Ambient Avatar. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI’15).
ACM, 337-340.
132. Höök, K and Löwgren, J 2012. Strong concepts:
Intermediate-level knowledge in interaction design
research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 19(3), p.23.
133. Hornecker, E 2005. A design theme for tangible
interaction: embodied facilitation. In ECSCW 2005 (pp.
23-43). Springer Netherlands.
134. Hornecker, E 2010. Creative idea exploration within the
structure of a guiding framework: the card brainstorming
game. In Proceedings of the fourth international
conference on Tangible, embedded, and embodied
interaction (TEI '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 101-108.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1709886.1709905
135. Hoskins, J 1998, Biographical objects - how things tell the
stories of people's lives. Routledge.
136. Hoste, L and Signer, B 2014. Water Ball Z: an augmented
fighting game using water as tactile feedback. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (TEI '14).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 173-176. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2540930.2540946.
137. Huang, D, Tory, M, Aseniero, BA, Bartram, L, Bateman, S,
Carpendale, S, Tang, A and Woodbury, R 2014, Personal
Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 99,
1.
138. Hughes D and Dumont K 1993, Using focus groups to
facilitate culturally anchored research. American Journal
of Community Psychology 1993, 21: 775-806.
139. Hupfeld, A and Rodden, T 2012, Laying the table for HCI:
uncovering ecologies of domestic food consumption. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
119-128. DOI=10.1145/2207676.2207694 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2207694

140. Huta, V 2013, Pursuing eudaimonia versus hedonia:
Distinctions, similarities, and relationships. In A.
Waterman (Ed.), The best within us: Positive psychology
perspectives on eudaimonic functioning. Washington, DC:
APA Book.
141. IDEO Method Cards, 2002, http://www.ideo.com/work/
method-cards/ Last accessed 25th May 2016.
142. Intille, SS 2004, A New Research Challenge: Persuasive
Technology to Motivate Healthy Aging. IEEE Transactions
on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 8(3), pp.
235-237.
143. Ingold, T 2013, Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art
and Architecture, Routledge.
144. Ishii, H, Lakatos, D, Bonanni, L and Labrune, JB 2012,
Radical atoms: beyond tangible bits, toward
transformable materials. Interactions 19, 1, pp. 38–51.

156. Karapanos, E, Zimmerman, J, Forlizzi, J and Martens, JB
2009, User Experience Over Time: An Initial Framework.
In Proc. CHI 2009.
157. Kehr, F, Hassenzahl, M, Laschke, M and Diefenbach, S
2012, A transformational product to improve self-control
strength: the chocolate machine. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 689-694.
DOI=10.1145/2207676.2207774 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2207676.2207774
158. Khot, R, Lee, J, Aggarwal, D, Hjorth, L, and Mueller, F 2015.
TastyBeats: Designing Palatable Representations of
Physical Activity. In Proc. CHI’15, ACM Press (2015), pp.
2933- 2942.
159. Khot, R, Lee, J, Hjorth, L, and Mueller, F 2015. TastyBeats:
Celebrating Heart Rate Data with a Drinkable Spectacle.
In Proc. TEI’15, ACM Press (2015), pp. 229-232.

145. Jafarinaimi, N, Forlizzi, J, Hurst, A and Zimmerman, J 2005,
Breakaway: an ambient display designed to change
human behavior, In Proc. CHI ’05 Extended Abstracts, ACM
Press, 1945- 1948.

160. Khot, R 2013, Sweat-atoms: crafting physical objects with
everyday exercise. In Proc. CHI EA '13, ACM Press, pp.
2701-2706.

146. James, W 1890, Chapter 10: The Consciousness of Self.
The Principles of Psychology. New York: Henry Holt.

161. Khot, R, Mueller, F and Hjorth, L 2013, SweatAtoms:
materializing physical activity. In Proc. IE '13, ACM Press,
Article 4, 7 pages.

147. Janssen, JH, Bailenson, JN, IJsselsteijn, WA and Westerink,
JHDM 2010, Intimate heartbeats: Opportunities for
affective communication technology. IEEE Transactions
on Affective Computing, 1, pp. 72–80.

162. Khot, R, Hjorth, L and Mueller, F 2014, Understanding
physical activity through 3D printed material artifacts. In
Proc. CHI '14, ACM Press, pp. 3835-3844.

148. Jansen, Y, Dragicevic, P and Fekete, JD 2013, Evaluating
the Efficiency of Physical Visualizations. In Proc. CHI '13,
ACM Press.
149. Jansen, Y, Dragicevic, P, Isenberg, P, Alexander, J, Karnik, A,
Kildal, J, Subramanian, S and Hornbæk, K 2015,
Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI '15), ACM, 3227-3236.
150. Jordan, PW 1997, The four pleasure: taking human factors
beyond usability. The 13th Triennial Congress of The
Interactional Ergonomics Association, 364-366.
151. Jung, H and Stolterman, E 2011, Form and materiality in
interaction design: a new approach to HCI. In
Proceedings of the conference extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems (CHI EA '11). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 399-408.
152. Jung, H 2011. Exploratory studies on digital form and
materiality, Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University.
153. Kay, M 2014, Challenges in personal health tracking: the
data isn't enough. XRDS 21, 2 (December 2014), 32-37.
DOI=10.1145/2678024 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2678024
154. Kahneman, D 2011, Thinking Fast and Slow. Toronto,
Ontario, Canada: Doubleday; 2011.
155. Karanam, Y, Filko, L, Kaser, L, Alotaibi, H, Makhsoom, E and
Voida S 2014. Motivational Affordances and Personality
Types in Personal Informatics. In Proceedings of the 2014
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct Publication (UbiComp ’14
Adjunct). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 79–82. DOI:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1145/2638728.2638800

163. Khot, R, Lee, J, Munz, H, Aggarwal, D and Mueller, F. 2014,
Tastybeats: making mocktails with heartbeats. In Proc.
CHI EA '14, ACM Press, pp. 467-470.
164. Khot, R, Andres, J, Lai, J, von Kaenel, J and Mueller, F 2016,
Fantibles: Capturing Cricket Fan's Story in 3D. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (pp. 883-894). ACM.
165. Kirk, DS, Sellen, A, Rother, C and Andwood, K 2006,
Understanding photowork. In Proc. CHI '13, ACM Press, pp.
761–770.
166. Kirk, DS and Sellen, A 2010, On human remains: Values
and practice in the home archiving of cherished objects.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 17, 3,
pp. 1-43.
167. Kitzinger, J 1995, Qualitative research. Introducing focus
groups. BMJ: British medical journal, 311(7000), 299.
168. Klasnja, P, Consolvo, S and Pratt, W 2011, How to Evaluate
Technologies for Health Behavior Change in HCI
Research. In Proc. CHI '11, ACM Press.
169. Kopytoff, I 1986. The cultural biography of things:
commoditization as process. The social life of things:
Commodities in cultural perspective, 68, pp.70-73.
170. Koskinen, I, Zimmerman, J, Binder, T, Redstrom, J and
Wensveen, S 2011, Design Research Through Practice:
From the Lab, Field, and Showroom. Morgan Kaufmann.
171. Kranz, M, Schmidt, A, Maldonado, A, Rusu, RB, Beetz, M,
Hörnler, B and Rigoll, G 2007, Context-aware kitchen
utilities. InProceedings of the 1st international
conference on Tangible and embedded interaction (pp.
213-214). ACM.

172. Krogh, PG, Markussen, T and Bang, AL 2015. Ways of
Drifting—Five Methods of Experimentation in Research
Through Design. In ICoRD’15–Research into Design
Across Boundaries Volume 1 (pp. 39-50). Springer India.

187. Lockton, D, Harrison, D and Stanton, N 2008. Design with
intent: Persuasive technology in a wider context. In
Persuasive technology (pp. 274-278). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.

173. Kuznetsov, S and Paulos, E 2010, Rise of the expert
amateur: Diy projects, communities, and cultures. In Proc.
NordiCHI '10.

188. Löwgren, J 2013, Annotated portfolios and other forms of
intermediate-level knowledge. Interactions 20(1): 30- 34.

174. Larsen, JE, Cuttone, A and Jørgensen, SL 2013. QS Spiral:
Visualizing periodic quantified self data. In CHI 2013
Workshop on Personal Informatics in the Wild: Hacking
Habits for Health & Happiness.
175. Latour, B 1999. Pandora's Hope. Essays on the reality of
science studies. Harvard University Press.
176. Lazar, A, Koehler, C, Tanenbaum, J and Nguyen, DH 2015,
Why we use and abandon smart devices. In Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp '15). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 635-646.
DOI=10.1145/2750858.2804288 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2750858.2804288.
177. Ledger, D and McCaffrey, D 2014, Inside Wearables: How
the Science of Human Behavior Change Offers the Secret
to Long-Term Engagement (White paper). Endeavor
Partners LLC.
178. Lee, M, Cha, S and Nam, T 2015, Patina Engraver:
Visualizing Activity Logs as Patina in Fashionable
Trackers. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '15). ACM, 1173-1182.
179. Leffer, S 2016, Chocolate 101: About Tempering -- What It
Is, How To Temper Chocolate and The Alternative. http://
www.chocoley.com/resources/about-temperingchocolate
180. Levine JA 2002, Non-exercise activity thermogenesis
(NEAT). Best Practice and Research Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism 16, pp. 679–702.
181. Li, I, Dey, A and Forlizzi, J 2010, A stage-based model of
personal informatics systems. In Proc. CHI '10, ACM Press,
pp. 557–566.
182. Li, I, Dey, A and Forlizzi, J 2011, Understanding my data,
myself: supporting self-reflection with ubicomp
technologies. In Proc. UbiComp '11, ACM Press, 405-414.
183. Lidwell, W, Holden, K and Butler, J 2003. Universal
Principles of Design. Rockport, Beverly, MA.
184. Lim, BY, Shick, A, Harrison, C and Hudson, SE 2011,
Pediluma: motivating physical activity through
contextual information and social influence. In
Proceedings of the fifth international conference on
Tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction (pp.
173-180). ACM.
185. Lin, JL, Mamykina, L, Lindtner, S, Delajoux, G and Strub, HB
2006, Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging physical activity with an
interactive computer game. In Proc. Ubicomp 2006,
Springer, pp. 261- 278.
186. Locke, E., and Latham, G. 1990. A theory of goal setting
and task performance, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliff, NJ
USA.

189. Lucero, A and Arrasvuori, J 2010. PLEX Cards: A source of
inspiration when designing for playfulness. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Fun
and Games, ACM Press, pp.28-37.
190. Ludden, G, Schifferstein, H and Hekkert, P 2006, Sensory
incongruity: comparing vision to touch, audition and
olfaction. Paper presented at the Fifth International
Conference on Design and Emotion, 27-29 September,
Goteborg, Sweden.
191. Ludden, G 2013. Designing feedback: multimodality and
specificity. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Congress of International Association of Societies of
Design Research (IASDR ’13). Tokyo.
192. Lupton, D 1996, Food, the Body and the Self. London:
Sage.
193. Lupton, D 2014, Self-tracking cultures: towards a
sociology of personal informatics. InProceedings of the
26th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference
on Designing Futures: the Future of Design (OzCHI '14).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 77-86.
DOI=10.1145/2686612.2686623 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2686612.2686623.
194. Lupton, D 2016, The Quantified Self: A Sociology of SelfTracking, Polity.
195. Lyle, P, Choi, JH and Foth, M 2014, Designing for
grassroots food production: an event-based urban
agriculture community. In Proceedings of the 26th
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference on
Designing Futures: the Future of Design (OzCHI '14). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 362-365.
DOI=10.1145/2686612.2686666 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2686612.2686666.
196. Lyubomirsky, S, King, L and Diener, E 2005, The Benefits
of Frequent Positive Affect: Does Happiness Lead to
Success? Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), pp. 803-855.
197. Macht, M, Meininger, J and Roth, J 2005, The pleasures of
eating: A qualitative analysis. Journal of Happiness
Studies, 6(2), 137-160.
198. Maitland, J, Sherwood, S, Barkhuus, L, Anderson, I,
Chalmers, M and Brown, B 2006, Increasing the
Awareness of Moderate Exercise with Pervasive
Computing. In Proc. IEEE Pervasive Health Conference, pp.
1-9.
199. Mamykina, L, Mynatt, E, Davidson, P and Greenblatt, D
2008, MAHI: investigation of social scaffolding for
reflective thinking in diabetes management. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
477-486. DOI=10.1145/1357054.1357131 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1357054.1357131
200. Mann, S, Janzen, R and Post M, 2006, Hydraulophone
design considerations: absement, displacement, and

velocity-sensitive music keyboard in which each key is a
water jet. InProceedings of the 14th annual ACM
international conference on Multimedia (MULTIMEDIA
'06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 519-528. DOI=http://
dx.doi.org/10.1145/1180639.1180751.
201. Mann, S, Janzen, R, Huang, J, Kelly, M, Ba, LJ and Chen, A
2010, User-interfaces based on the water-hammer effect:
water-hammer piano as an interactive percussion
surface. In Proceedings of the fifth international
conference on Tangible, embedded, and embodied
interaction (TEI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1-8.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1935701.1935703.
202. Mauriello, M, Gubbels, M and Froehlich JE 2014. Social
Fabric Fitness: The Design and Evaluation of Wearable Etextile Displays to Support Group Running. In
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2833–2842. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2556288.2557299
203. Maynes-Aminzade, D 2005, Edible Bits: Seamless
Interfaces between People, Data and Food. In Proc. CHI
2005.
204. McCarthy, J and Wright, P 2004. Technology as Experience,
The MIT Press.
205. McLuhan, M 1994. Understanding media: The extensions
of man. MIT press.
206. Mellis, D, Follmer, S, Hartmann, B, Buechley, L and Gross,
MD 2013, FAB at CHI: digital fabrication tools, design,
and community. In Proc. CHI EA '13. ACM Press, pp.
3307-3310.
207. Miller, WC 2002, The Improbability of Lifestyle Change,
Healthy Weight Journal, 16(6), pp.84- 85.
208. Miller, D 2008, The comfort of things. Polity, Cambridge.
209. Miller, D 1987, Material culture and mass consumption.
Basil Blackwell.
210. Miller, D 2010, Stuff. Polity Press, Cambridge.
211. Mine, MR, Barnard, D, Yang, B and Baker, D 2011, Thermal
Interactive Media. In Proc. SIGGRAPH ’11, ACM, Article 18,
1 page.
212. Mota, C 2011, The rise of personal fabrication. In Proc.
Creativity and cognition (CandC '11), ACM Press, pp. 279288.
213. Müller, LJ, Mekler, ED and Opwis, K 2015, Facets In HCI:
Towards Understanding Eudaimonic UX -- Preliminary
Findings. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI EA '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2283-2288. DOI=10.1145/2702613.2732836 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702613.2732836
214. Mueller, F, Gibbs, MR, Vetere, F, and Edge, D 2014.
Supporting the creative game design process with
exertion cards. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM Press, pp.
2211-2220.
215. Mueller, F, Edge, D, Vetere, F, Gibbs, MR, Agamanolis, S,
Bongers, B and Sheridan, JG 2011. Designing sports: A
framework for exertion games. In Proceedings of the

SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM Press, pp.2651-2660.
216. Mueller, S, Mohr, T, Guenther, K, Frohnhofen, J and
Baudisch, P 2014, faBrickation: fast 3D printing of
functional objects by integrating construction kit
building blocks. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems (pp.
3827-3834). ACM.
217. Munson, SA and Consolvo, S 2012, Exploring Goal-setting,
Rewards, Self-monitoring, and Sharing to Motivate
Physical Activity, Pervasive Health 2012, pp. 25-32.
218. Muraven, M and Baumeister, RF 2000, Self-regulation and
depletion of limited resources: Does self-control
resemble a muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126, 2, pp.
247-259.
219. Murer, M, Aslan, I and Tscheligi, M 2013, LOLLio:
exploring taste as playful modality. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and
Embodied Interaction (TEI '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
299-302. DOI=10.1145/2460625.2460675 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2460625.2460675
220. Narumi, T, Ban, Y, Kajinami, T, Tanikawa, T and Hirose, M
2012, Augmented perception of satiety: controlling food
consumption by changing apparent size of food with
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 109-118.
DOI=10.1145/2207676.2207693 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2207676.2207693
221. Narumi, T, Kajinami, T, Tanikawa, T and Hirose, M 2010,
Meta cookie. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Emerging
Technologies (SIGGRAPH '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 18 , 1 pages. DOI=10.1145/1836821.1836839
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1836821.1836839.
222. Nelson, SA and Metaxatos, P 2016. The Internet of Things
Needs Design, Not Just Technology. https://hbr.org/
2016/04/the-internet-of-things-needs-design-not-justtechnology. Last accessed on May 21st, 2016.
223. Nenonen, V, Lindblad, A, Häkkinen, V, Laitinen, T, Jouhtio,
M and Hämäläinen, P 2007, Using heart rate to control
an interactive game. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '07). ACM, 853-856. DOI=10.1145/1240624.1240752
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1240624.1240752.
224. Neuman, WL 2006, Social Research Methods (6th ed.),
Pearson Education, USA. Nielsen, J 1993, Usability
engineering, Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
225. Nissen, B, Bowers, J, Wright, PC, Hook, J and Newell, C
2014, June. Volvelles, domes and wristbands: embedding
digital fabrication within a visitor's trajectory of
engagement. In Conference on Designing Interactive
Systems (pp. 825-834).
226. Nissen, B and Bowers, J 2015, Data-Things: Digital
Fabrication Situated within Participatory Data Translation
Activities. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2467-2476.
227. Norman, D 2004, Emotional design. New York: Basic
Books.

228. Odom, W, Pierce, J, Stolerman, E and Blevis, E 2009,
Understanding why we preserve some things and discard
others in the context of interaction design. In Proc. CHI
2009, ACM Press, pp. 1053-1062.
229. O'Hara, K, Helmes, J, Sellen, A, Harper, R, ten Bhom̈ er, M
and van den Hoven, E 2012, Food for talk: phototalk in
the context of sharing a meal. Human–Computer
Interaction 27 (1–2), 124–150,
230. Oliveira, Rd and Oliver, N 2008, TripleBeat: enhancing
exercise performance with persuasion. In Proc. MobileHCI
'08, ACM Press, pp. 255-264.
231. Oliveto, G 2008. Market research explained. Amsterdam:
ESOMAR Publications.
232. Oms, LJ, Torres, E and Amon, C 1997, The Water Table: a
fluid exhibit for the Carnegie Science Center. In Proc. FIE
’97, IEEE, pp. 515-520.
233. Orji, R, Vassileva, J and Mandryk, RL 2013, LunchTime: a
slow-casual game for long-term dietary behavior change.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 17, 6 (August 2013), pp.
1211-1221. DOI=10.1007/s00779-012-0590-6 http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-012-0590-6.
234. Paay, J, Kjeldskov, J, Skov, MB and O'Hara, K 2012, Cooking
together: a digital ethnography. In CHI '12 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
EA '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1883-1888.
DOI=10.1145/2212776.2223723 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2212776.2223723.
235. Pantzar, M and Ruckenstein, M 2014, The heart of
everyday analytics: Emotional, material and practical
extensions in self-tracking market, Consum. Markets
Culture 2014.
236. Pate RR, Freedson PS, Sallis JF, Taylor WC, Sirard J, Trost
SG, Dowda M 2002, Compliance with physical activity
guidelines: prevalence in a population of children and
youth. Ann Epidemiol 12(5), pp.303–308.
237. Patel, MS, Asch, DA and Volpp, KG 2015. Wearable Devices
as Facilitators, Not Drivers, of Health Behavior Change.
Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) 313,
5 (Feb. 2015), 459–460.
238. Patton, MQ 2002, Qualitative research and evaluation
methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
239. Pels, T, Kao, C and Goel, S 2014, FatBelt: motivating
behavior change through isomorphic feedback. In
Proceedings of the adjunct publication of the 27th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and
technology, ACM, pp. 123-124.
240. Petrelli, D, Whittaker, S and Brockmeier, J 2008,
AutoTopography: what can physical mementos tell us
about digital memories?. In Proc. CHI ‘08, ACM Press, pp.
53-62.
241. Petrelli, D and Whittaker, S 2010, Family memories in the
home: contrasting physical and digital mementos. In
Personal Ubiquitous Computing, 14, 2, pp.153-169.
242. Purpura, S, Schwanda, V, Williams, K, Stubler, W and
Sengers, P 2011, Fit4life: the design of a persuasive
technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight.
InProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '11). ACM, pp.

423-432. DOI=10.1145/1978942.1979003 http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1978942.1979003.
243. Qkies 2015. http://qkies.de.
244. Rasmussen, MK, Pedersen, EW, Petersen, MG and
Hornbæk, K 2012, Shape-changing interfaces: a review of
the design space and open research questions. In Proc.
CHI '12, ACM Press.
245. Reeves, S, Benford, S, O'Malley, C and Fraser, M 2005,
Designing the spectator experience. In Proc. CHI’05, ACM
(2005), 741-750.
246. Reitberger, WH, Spreicer, W and Fitzpatrick, G 2014,
Nutriflect: reflecting collective shopping behavior and
nutrition. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '14). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 3309-3318.
DOI=10.1145/2556288.2557384 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2556288.2557384
247. Rejeski, WJ 1981, The Perception of Exertion: A Psych
sociological Integration. Journal of Sport Psychology, 4,
pp.305-320.
248. Requicha, AA and Voelcker, HB 1977. Constructive solid
geometry.
249. Resner, B 2001. Rover@ Home: Computer mediated
remote interaction between humans and dogs (Doctoral
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
250. Richter, H, Manke, F and Seror, M 2013, LiquiTouch: liquid
as a medium for versatile tactile feedback on touch
surfaces. In Proc. TEI’13, ACM (2013), 315-318.
251. Rogers, Y 2004. New theoretical approaches for HCI.
Annual review of information science and technology,
38(1), pp.87-143.
252. Rogers, Y, Hazlewood, WR, Marshall et al. 2010, Ambient
influence: can twinkly lights lure and abstract
representations trigger behavioral change? In Proc.
Ubicomp '10, ACM Press, pp. 261-270.
253. Rogers, Y 2011, Interaction design gone wild: striving for
wild theory. interactions 18, 4 (July 2011), 58-62.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978822.1978834.
254. Rogers, Y 2012. HCI theory: classical, modern, and
contemporary.Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered
Informatics, 5(2), pp.1-129.
255. Rooksby, J, Rost, M, Morrison, A and Chalmers, M 2014,
Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '14). ACM, pp.1163-1172.
DOI=10.1145/2556288.2557039 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2556288.2557039
256. Ruckenstein, M 2014, Visualized and Interacted Life:
Personal Analytics and Engagements with Data Doubles,
Societies, 4, pp. 68–84.
257. Sanders, EBN and Williams, C 2001, Harnessing People's
Creativity: Ideation and Expression through Visual
Communication. In Langford J and McDonagh-Philp D.
(Eds.) Focus Groups: Supporting Effective Product
Development. Taylor and Francis.
258. Sawka, MN, Burke, LM, Eichner, ER, Maughan, RJ, Montain,
SJ and Stachenfeld, NS, 2007. American College of Sports

Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement.
Medicine and science in sports and exercise,39(2), pp.
377-390.
259. Schoning, J, Rogers, Y and Kruger, A 2012, Digitally
Enhanced Food. IEEE Pervasive Computing 11, 3, pp. 4-6.
260. Segura, EM, Waern, A, Moen, J and Johansson, C 2013, The
Design Space of Body Games: Technological, Physical,
and Social Design. In Proc. of CHI’13, 3365-3374.
261. Sennett, R 2008, The Craftsman, Penguin Books.
262. Siek, KA, Connelly, KH, Rogers, Y, Rohwer, P, Lambert, D
and Welch, JL 2006, When Do We Eat? An Evaluation of
Food Items Input into an Electronic Food Monitoring
Application, in Pervasive Health Conference and
Workshops, 2006 , vol., no., pp.1-10.
263. Siek, KA, Hayes, GR, Newman, MW and Tang, JC 2014,
Field deployments: Knowing from using in context. In
Kellogg, W. A. and Olson, J. S., (Eds.)., Ways of Knowing in
HCI, p 119-142. Springer.
264. Silverstone, R and Hirsch, E. eds. Consuming
Technologies: Media and Information in Domestic Spaces.
London:Routledge, 1992.
265. Sheridan, J 2010, When clapping data speaks to Wii:
physical creativity and performative interaction in
playground games and songs. In Proc. BCS HCI 2010, ACM
Press, pp.299-308.
266. Shneiderman, B 2003, Why not make interfaces better
than 3d reality? IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 23, 6.
267. Sylvester, A, Döring, T, and Schmidt, A 2010, Liquids,
Smoke, and Soap Bubbles - Reflections on Materials for
Ephemeral User Interfaces. In Proc. TEI’10, ACM (2010),
269-270.
268. Smoothfood 2015, http://smoothfood.de/food-forms/?
lang=en
269. Spence, C 2002. Multisensory attention and tactile
information-processing. Behavioural Brain Research,
135(1-2), 57-64.
270. Spence, C and Piqueras-Fiszman, B 2013, Technology at
the dining table. Flavour 2 (1), 16. Srof, BJ and VelsorFriedrich, B 2006, Health Promotion in Adolescents: A
Review of Pender’s Health Promotion Model, Nursing
Science Quarterly, 19(4), pp. 366-373.
271. Stach, T, Graham, TC, Yim, J and Rhodes, RE 2009, Heart
rate control of exercise video games. In Proc. Graphics
interface 2009, Canadian Information Processing Society,
pp. 125-132. Stach, T and Graham, T 2011, Exploring
haptic feedback in exergames. In Proc. INTERACT’11, pp.
18-35.
272. Steinberg, FM, Bearden, MM and Keen, CL 2003, Cocoa
and chocolate flavonoids: Implications for cardiovascular
health, Journal of the American Dietetic Association,
Volume 103, Issue 2, February 2003, Pages 215-223, ISSN
0002-8223.
273. Stolterman, E and Wiberg, M 2010, Concept-Driven
Interaction Design Research. Human–Computer
Interaction, 25(2), 95-118.
274. Strauss, A and Corbin, J 1998, Basics of Qualitative
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing

Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA, USA: SAGE
Publications.
275. Stusak, S, Tabard, A, Sauka, F, Khot, R and Butz, A 2014,
Activity sculptures: exploring the impact of physical
visualizations on running activity. TVCG 20, 12 (2014),
2201–2210.
276. Stusak, S, Hobe, M and Butz, A 2016, If Your Mind Can
Grasp It, Your Hands Will Help. In Proceedings of the
TEI'16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 92-99). ACM.
277. Student Innovation Contest UIST 2013, http://
www.acm.org/uist/uist2013/contest.php
278. Swan, M 2012. Sensor mania! The internet of things,
wearable computing, objective metrics, and the
Quantified Self 2.0. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2012, 1, pp.
217–253.
279. Sundstrom̈ , P, Taylor, A, Grufberg, K, Wirstrom̈ , N,
Belenguer, JS and Lundén, M 2011, Inspirational bits:
towards a shared understanding of the digital material.
In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human
factors in computing systems (CHI '11). ACM, pp.15611570.
280. Taylor, SE and Brown, JD 1988, Illusion and well-being: A
social psychological perspective on mental health,
Psychological Bulletin, 103, pp. 193-210.
281. Taylor, B, Birk, M, Mandryk, RL and Ivkovic, Z 2013, Posture
training with real-time visual feedback. In CHI'13
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (pp. 3135-3138). ACM.
282. Tholander, J and Nylander, S 2015, Snot, Sweat, Pain, Mud,
and Snow: Performance and Experience in the Use of
Sports Watches. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2913-2922.
DOI=10.1145/2702123.2702482 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2702123.2702482
283. Thompson, D, Baranowski, T, Buday, R, Baranowski, J,
Thompson, V, Jago, R and Griffith, MJ 2010, Serious Video
Games for Health: How Behavioral Science Guided the
Development of a Serious Video Game. Simul. Gaming 41,
4 (August 2010), 587-606.
DOI=10.1177/1046878108328087 http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/1046878108328087.
284. Tomporowski, PD 2003, Effects of acute bouts of exercise
on cognition. Acta Psychologica 112.3, pp. 297-324.
285. Toprak, C Platt, J Ho, H and Mueller, F 2013, Cart-Load-OFun: Designing Digital Games for Trams. In Proc. FDG
2013, 8 pages.
286. Toscos, T and Connelly, K 2008, Encouraging Physical
Activity in Teens: can technology help reduce barriers to
physical activity in adolescent girls? In Proc. Pervasive
Health’08.
287. Tudor-Locke, C, Bassett, BR, Swartz, AM et al. 2004, A
preliminary study of one year of pedometer selfmonitoring. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 28, pp. 158162.

288. Ullmer, B and Ishii, H 2000, Emerging frameworks for
tangible user interfaces. IBM systems journal 39, 3(4), pp.
915-931.
289. Vallgar ̊ da, A, and Redström, J 2007, Computational
composites. In Proceedings of the 25th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI
'07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 513 - 522.

playing media files. In Proc. HCI’07, Springer-Verlag, pp.
1240-1248.
304. Watts M and Ebbutt D 1987, More than the sum of the
parts: research methods in group interviewing. British
Educational Research Journal 1987, 13: 25-34.

290. Van Wijk, J 2005, The value of visualization. In Proc. IEEE
Visualisation, pp. 79-86.

305. Webster, JD, Bohlmeijer, ET and Westerhof, GJ 2010,
Mapping the future of reminiscence: A conceptual guide
for research and practice. Research on Aging, 32(4), pp.
527-564.

291. Van den Hoven, E 2004, Graspable Cues for Everyday
Recollecting. PhD thesis, Technische Universiteit
Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

306. Weinberg, RS and Gould, D 2006, Foundations of Sport
and Exercise Psychology. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL,
USA.

292. Van Den Hoven, E, Frens, J, Aliakseyeu, D, Martens, JB,
Overbeeke, K and Peters, P 2007, Design research &
tangible interaction. In Proceedings of the 1st
international conference on Tangible and embedded
interaction (pp. 109-115). ACM.

307. Wei, J, Ma, X and Zhao, S 2014, Food messaging: using
edible medium for social messaging. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2873- 2882.
DOI=10.1145/2556288.2557026 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2556288.2557026

293. Vande Moere, A 2008, Beyond the tyranny of the pixel:
Exploring the physicality of information visualization. In
Proc. IV’08.

308. Weiser, M 1991. The computer for the 21st century.
Scientific american,265(3), pp.94-104.

294. Vande Moere, A and Patel, S 2009, Analyzing the design
approaches of physical data sculptures in a design
education context. In Proc. VINCI’09.

309. Werner, J, Wettach, R and Hornecker, E 2008, Unitedpulse: feeling your partner’s pulse. In Proc. MobileHCI ’08,
ACM Press, pp. 535-538.

295. Velayanikal, M 2014. Can a fitness tracker which rewards
users solve the problem of wearable tech? https://
www.techinasia.com/mymo-fitness-tracker-givesrewards-to-users/. (2014). Accessed: 17-07-2015.

310. Wiberg, M 2014. Methodology for materiality: interaction
design research through a material lens. Personal
Ubiquitous Comput. 18, 3 (March 2014), 625-636.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-013-0686- 7

296. Verbeek, PP 2005, What things do - philosophical
reflections on technology, agency and design. The
Pennsylvania State Press.

311. Willis, KD, Xu, C, Wu, KJ, Levin, G and Gross, MD 2011,
Interactive fabrication: new interfaces for digital
fabrication. In Proc. TEI '11.

297. Vermeulen, J, Lindsay, M, Johannes, S, Russell, B and
Sheelagh, C 2016, Heartefacts: Augmenting Mobile Video
Sharing Using Wrist-Worn Heart Rate Sensors. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (pp. 712-723). ACM.

312. Wölfel, C and Merritt, T 2013. Method card design
dimensions: a survey of card-based design tools. In
Human-Computer Interaction–INTERACT 2013, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 479-486.

298. Victor, B 2013. A brief rant on the future of interaction
design, http://worrydream.com/
ABriefRantOnTheFutureOfInter actionDesign/ Last
accessed July 2013.
299. Viseu, A and Suchman, L 2010. Wearable augmentations:
Imaginaries of the informed body. Technologized Images,
Technologized Bodies, pp.161-184.
300. Walmink, W, Wilde, D and Mueller, FF 2014, Displaying
heart rate data on a bicycle helmet to support social
exertion experiences. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and
Embodied Interaction, TEI’14, ACM Press, pp. 97-104.
301. Walsh, G and Golbeck, J 2014, StepCity: a preliminary
investigation of a personal informatics-based social
game on behavior change. In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14).
ACM, pp. 2371-2376. DOI=10.1145/2559206.2581326
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2559206.2581326
302. Ware, C 2003. Design as applied perception, In J, Carroll.
(eds). HCI models, theories and frameworks, Elsevier: USA.
303. Watanabe, J 2007, VortexBath: study of tangible
interaction with water in bathroom for accessing and

313. Woodward, I 2007, Understanding material culture.
London, UK: Sage Publications.
314. Woolrych, A, Hornbæk, K, Frøkjær, E and Cockton, G 2011.
Ingredients and meals rather than recipes: A proposal for
research that does not treat usability evaluation methods
as indivisible wholes. International Journal of Human
Computer Interaction, 27(10), 940--970.
315. Wrigley, CJ 2011. Visceral hedonic rhetoric: exploring the
design of interactive products. VDM Publishers,
Saarbrücken, Germany.
316. Yang, Y, Lee, H and Gurrin, C 2013, Visualizing lifelog data
for different interaction platforms. In CHI '13 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
EA '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1785-1790.
DOI=10.1145/2468356.2468676 http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2468356.2468676
317. Yardley, L 2000. Dilemmas in qualitative health research.
Psychology and health, 15(2), 215 - 228.
318. Yi, JS, Kang, YA, Stasko, J and Jacko, J 2007, Toward a
Deeper Understanding of the Role of Interaction in
Information Visualization. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (November

2007), 1224-1231. DOI=10.1109/TVCG.2007.70515 http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2007.70515.
319. Yu, B, Arents, R, Funk, M, Hu, J and Feijs, LM 2016.
HeartPlotter: Visualizing Bio-data by Drawing on Paper.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM
press, pp. 1794-1799.
320. Zhang, X, Xu, W, Huang, MC, Amini, N and Ren, F 2013, See
UV on your skin: an ultraviolet sensing and visualization
system. InProceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Body Area Networks (pp. 22-28). ICST
(Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering).
321. Zhao, C, Popovic, V, Ferreira, L and Xiaobo, L 2008. Vehicle
design research for Chinese elderly drivers, In the
proceedings Computer aided industrial design and
conceptual design 7th International conference,
Hangzhou, 1-5
322. Zimmerman, J and Forlizzi J 2008, The role of design
artifacts in design theory construction, Artifact, 2(1), pp.
41- 45.
323. Zimmerman, J, Forlizzi, J and Evenson, S 2007, Research
through design as a methods for interaction design
research in HCI, In Proc. CHI’07, ACM, pp. 493-502.
324. Zoran, A and Coelho, M 2011, Cornucopia: The Concept of
Digital Gastronomy. Leonardo, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 425-431..

NOTES

