Towards a Framework for Dynamic Data Physicalisation
Beat Signer, Payam Ebrahimi, Timothy J. Curtin and Ahmed K.A. Abdullah

Fig. 1. Various types of interactions with dynamic data physicalisations (pointing on the left, squeezing in the middle and weighting on
the right) as they might in the future be supported by different end effectors of the tangible hologram (TangHo) [17] platform or other
dynamic data physicalisation solutions
Abstract—Advanced data visualisation techniques enable the exploration and analysis of large datasets. Recently, there is the
emerging field of data physicalisation, where data is represented in physical space (e.g. via physical models) and can no longer only
be explored visually, but also by making use of other senses such as touch. Most existing data physicalisation solutions are static
and cannot be dynamically updated based on a user’s interaction. Our goal is to develop a framework for new forms of dynamic data
physicalisation in order to support an interactive exploration and analysis of datasets. Based on a study of the design space for dynamic
data physicalisation, we are therefore working on a grammar for representing the fundamental physical operations and interactions that
can be applied to the underlying data. Our envisioned extensible data physicalisation framework will enable the rapid prototyping of
dynamic data physicalisations and thereby support researchers who want to experiment with new combinations of physical variables or
output devices for dynamic data physicalisation as well as designers and application developers who are interested in the development
of innovative dynamic data physicalisation solutions.
Index Terms—Data physicalisation, conceptual framework, software framework, interactive data exploration, data analysis

1

I NTRODUCTION

Advanced data visualisation techniques are often used to deal with information overload when exploring and analysing large datasets. These
visualisations help us in finding hidden patterns and connections but
might also be used for designing the information space and interactions in order to tell a story and enable the audience to explore the
(data) landscape with their eyes, as nicely illustrated in a TED Talk
by David McCandless about The Beauty of Data Visualisation1 . Hans
Rosling, who introduced new interactive visualisation tools for working with data, further stated that by using the right tools for visual
data exploration and analysis we might ”let the dataset change your
mindset”2 .
Whilst data visualisation only makes use of a single modality (vision)
for exploring and analysing a dataset, data physicalisation (DP) is a
recently emerging research field that aims to go beyond a visual data
representation by encoding data in physical space and, for example,
enabling haptic interactions with a dataset. A survey on different
designs for haptic data visualisations and how these are useful for blind
people to feel line graphs has, for instance, been presented by Paneels
and Roberts [13]. They showed that not only blind people can profit
from haptic data encoding, but the haptic modality can also be used
alongside other modalities to increase the number of variables that can
be ”visualised”.

• Beat Signer, Payam Ebrahimi and Ahmed K.A. Abdullah are with the
Web & Information Systems Engineering Lab at Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
E-mail: {bsigner,pebrahim,aabdulla}@vub.be.
• Timothy J. Curtin, E-mail: tim@timcurtin.ie.

The term data physicalisation has recently been proposed by
Jansen et al. [9] as ”A data physicalization (or simply physicalization)
is a physical artifact whose geometry or material properties encode
data”. This definition has further been extended by Willett et al. [22],
suggesting that data physicalisation should be considered in both, embedded as well as situated context. While situated data representations
display data in proximity to data referents, embedded data representations display data in a way that it spatially coincides with data referents.
Hogan and Hornecker [6] use the term multisensory data representation
as an alternative for data physicalisation and have carried out some
prior work towards a design space for multisensory data representation. The same idea of multisensory information visualisation has been
discussed by Roberts and Walker [14] in their proposal for a united
theory of visualisation that unifies multiple senses and allow users to
integrate different modalities. They motivate further research on the
identification of different perceptual variables and design strategies
for representing information across different modalities. Multisensory
data representation—including for example touch or sound—can help
in enhancing the perception of complex data relationships. However,
these new forms of data representation approaches require a better
understanding of the semiotics of multisensory data design [16]. The
emerging interest in data physicalisation is also reflected by recent
workshops about the challenges and future directions for making data
physical [1] as well as some dedicated data physicalisation websites,
including an extensive Wiki on data physicalisation3 .
Physical visualisations are not new and the earliest forms of physical visualisations date back to the use of Mesopotamian clay tokens
in 8000 BC [15]. While many different forms of physical visualisations
have been used in the past, these are normally static physicalisations
which cannot easily be updated when the underlying data changes, or be

1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Zg-C8AAIGg
2 https://www.ted.com/talks/hans

rosling at state

3 http://dataphys.org

Final version published in Proceedings of the International Workshop Toward a
Design Language for Data Physicalization, Berlin, Germany, October 2018

dynamically changed based on some user interaction with the physical
data representation. A major advantage of using data physicalisation
for the exploration and analysis of datasets is the fact that physical visualisations can be more efficient as shown in a study by Jansen et al. [8]
where the interaction with 3D bar chart visualisations on a screen has
been compared to the interaction with a physical version of the bar
charts. Vande Moere [11] questions the current use of information displays to simulate real world metaphors which are then used to represent
abstract data, and proposed different forms of data physicalisation via
ambient displays and pixel sculptures to go beyond ”the tyranny of
the pixel”. Instead of using classical screen-based data visualisation
techniques, abstract data can be physically embodied in data sculptures
as illustrated in a qualitative study by Vande Moere [12].
Many sophisticated data visualisations are based on heuristic approaches [3] rather than any structure or grammar. However, in
The Grammar of Graphics [21], Wilkinson follows a more formal
and fundamental approach for data-driven visualisation. An early implementation of automatic data visualisation was Mackinlay’s [10]
automatic design of graphical presentations of relational information
stored in databases which later resulted in the VizQL language to query,
analyse and visualise data, and inspired solutions such as the wellknown Tableau4 data visualisation tool. While there is currently no
formal and fundamental data-driven approach for data physicalisation,
this might be the key for automatically dealing with complex data
physicalisations in the future.
The process of creating static data physicalisations via MakerVis
has been studied in three case studies by Swaminathan et al. [18] and
the limitations of current physicalisation fabrication workflows have
been illustrated. While existing data physicalisation solutions currently
offer limited support for dynamic updates, there is a need for dynamic
data physicalisation [9] to support interactive data exploration and
analysis tasks where the physicalisation is updated based on a user’s
interaction. Dynamic data physicalisation in the form of bar charts
on a shape-changing display has, for example, been investigated by
Taher et al. [19]. In the long term, the vision-driven design research
on radical atoms and programmable matter by Ishii et al. [7] might
lead to more flexible materials with programmable physical properties
which could be applied in data physicalisation. While Ishii’s research
group is currently developing shape-changing physical interfaces to
simulate interactions with programmable mater that might be available
in the future, our lab is working on tangible holograms and the tangible
hologram (TangHo) platform [17] that can also be used for different
forms of dynamic data physicalisation.
The emerging field of data physicalisation is promising for the representation of multidimensional datasets and the exploration and analysis
of data via multiple modalities, but there are many open research
problems—as for example stated by Jansen et al. [9]—that have to be
addressed in order to better understand and develop better data physicalisation experiences. In the following, we list the research problems
related to our work on a framework for dynamic data physicalisation:

• For a more systematic approach in the design and development
of data physicalisations, there is a need for a conceptual data
physicalisation framework as, for example, seen for the domain
of tangible interaction [20].
• Rather than implementing data physicalisations from scratch,
there is a need for data physicalisation software frameworks
to support designers and developers in the rapid prototyping of
design alternatives and the evaluation of their performance.
• The combination of physical interactions and synthetic interactions is a challenging task and there is a lack of data physicalisation interaction design guidelines on how to best combine
physical with synthetic interactions. Also new forms of flexible
multi-user interactions that are supported by data physicalisation—
and go beyond the traditional WIMP interaction—need to be
further investigated.
2

DYNAMIC DATA P HYSICALISATION F RAMEWORK

While many existing data physicalisation solutions are built from
scratch, our objective is to develop a conceptual as well as software
framework that can be used for the rapid prototyping and experimentation with dynamic data physicalisation solutions. For a more systematic
approach in the design and development of data physicalisations, there
is a need for a conceptual data physicalisation framework as, for example, seen for the domain of tangible interaction [20], which can then
also serve the development of a software framework for dynamic data
physicalistion. The core of our dynamic data physicalisation framework
will be informed by an investigation of the dynamic data physicalisation design space as well as a dynamic data physicalisation grammar.
The software framework for dynamic data physicalisation that we are
currently developing is going to be extensible via specific software
drivers in order to ensure that it can deal with future data physicalisation technologies and smart materials. An overview of our conceptual
framework for dynamic data physicalisation is given in Figure 2.
User Level

Specification

Assembly

Interaction

Driver
Selection

Feedback
Data

Interpreter

Instruction Set

Processing

Intermediary
Representations

Output
PhysDIO

Physicalisations

Framework Level

Fig. 2. Conceptual framework for dynamic data physicalisation

• Most existing data physicalisation applications are static and
cannot be easily updated. In order to support an interactive exploration and analysis of datasets as seen in on-screen visualisation
solutions (human-in-the-loop data exploration), there is a need
for new forms of dynamic data visualisation.
• Many existing data physicalisation solutions follow a heuristic
approach. In order to build more flexible and data-driven physicalisations, there is a need for a formal and fundamental definition
in the form of a grammar of data physicalisation.
• While there is some initial research on the data physicalisation
design space, there is a need to better understand the design
space for dynamic data physicalisation, including the physical
encoding of data and the perceptual effectiveness of this encoding
via different modalities.
4 https://www.tableau.com

Data is going to be interpreted based on a number of specifications
provided by the user (e.g. the set of data dimensions to be physicalised)
in combination with the instruction set defined by the data physicalisation grammar. The resulting intermediary representation is then
shown to the user together with possible physical variables in order
that they can assemble the desired physical device-independent output (PhysDIO) consisting of a selection of these physical variables
based on their preferences (e.g. a user might prefer haptic over thermal
physicalisation). In a final phase, the user has the chance to select
between different available drivers/devices which will then be used for
transforming the PhysDIO into a concrete dynamic data physicalisation.
Note that in contrast to existing static data physicalisations, at this
stage any interaction by one or multiple users with the physical data
representation might change the underlying specification and result in
a dynamic update of the corresponding data physicalisation.
Our goal is to design a software framework for dynamic data physicalisation by envisioning future technological advancements similar to

dynamic data physicalisation. As stated earlier, we take existing technologies into account, but in our vison-driven design research we also
consider dynamic physicalisations which might currently not yet be
technically feasible.
A detailed investigation of the dynamic data physicalisation design
space helps in coming up with different forms of physical data encodings and a mapping of physical variables to the variables of a data
physicalisation grammar. Thereby, we have to take into account that the
features of a physical variable will dictate the type of digital information that it can represent (e.g. depending on how many different values
a user will be able to distinguish). It is therefore necessary to evaluate
the perceptual effectiveness of individual physical variables as well
as the potential combinations of physical variables in order to know
how effective they are in encoding and communicating data. This can
happen through the study of existing literature as well as via specific
experiments which help us to better understand for what kind of data a
physicalisation makes sense and will ultimately result in an improved
perceptual effectiveness.
Fig. 3. User interacting with an early prototype of the TangHo platform
consisting of a Microsoft HoloLens and two wearable Lego Mindstormsbased robot arms with their changeable end effectors for the physical
augmentation of digital holograms

the vision-driven design research approach proposed by Ishii et al. [7]
for programmable matter. While we focus on the fundamental operators and interactions for dynamic data physicalisation, not all of
the features offered by the core of our framework might already be
supported by existing data physicalisation technologies. However, our
framework for dynamic data physicalisation can be extended via specific software drivers transforming the physical device-independent
output into some concrete data physicalisations. For example, such
a driver might transform the PhysDIO produced during the processing phase into commands for the tangible hologram (TangHo) [17]
platform which is currently developed in our research lab and enables
the experimentation with different physical variables for new forms of
dynamic data physicalisation. Figure 3 shows a user interacting with
an early prototype of the TangHo platform.
Our data physicalisation framework is going to make use of existing
approaches for importing data (e.g. reading data from a file, connecting
to a relational database management system (RDBMS) or connecting
to a cluster). We see our dynamic data physicalisation approach as an
alternative to pure data visualisation and will therefore not focus on
other issues of data analysis (e.g. data warehousing, machine learning
or clustering) but rather assume that users understand that some preprocessing might be necessary depending on the type of data.
Further, our goal is to make the software framework available to the
research community in order that other researchers working on data
physicalisation can profit from its rapid prototyping and extensibility
features. The resulting framework can be used for building various
forms of data physicalisation applications, ranging from physical interfaces for the playful exploration and analysis of datasets (e.g. in a
museum as seen in ArtVis [5]) to the professional use by a data scientist
in an exploratory data analysis task.
2.1 Dynamic Data Physicalisation Design Space
In order to build a dynamic data physicalisation framework, we first
have to investigate the design space for dynamic data physicalisation
and evaluate recent technological developments for dynamic data physicalisation. Thereby, we have to define a set of physical variables
for dynamic data physicalisation and verify their effectiveness in the
multisensory representation of multidimensional datasets. This can
be achieved by taking existing work on multisensory data representation [6] into account and by analysing recent technological developments for dynamic data physicalisation. These technological developments range from low-level actuators for implementing physical
variables such as smoothness, hardness or sponginess to the simulation
of programmable matter [7] or the use of tangible holograms [17] for

2.2

Data Physicalisation Grammar

We are less interested in designing specific data physicalisations based
on a heuristic approach but our objective is rather to define a formal
grammar for dynamic data physicalisation. This formal specification
can then be used in the automatic and data-driven data physicalisation
approach shown earlier in Figure 2, which will be able do deal with
complex physicalisations and interactions. To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no such grammar and data-driven approach for
dynamic data physicalisation.
We are currently investigating a way to formally represent physicalisations and defining a set of rules and models to produce them. The
definition of a grammar for data physicalisation is thereby informed
by existing work in the domains of Information Visualisation (InfoVis)
and Scientific Visualisation (SciVis) as well as recent developments
in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and Tangible, Embedded and
Embodied Interaction (TEI). Note that we are adopting a more general
meaning of grammar—that goes beyond a grammar for programming
languages—similar to the work of Wilkinson [21]. The data physicalisation grammar is going to support different types of variables. We
plan to distinguish between atomic variables which are supported by
the data physicalisation grammar out of the box and complex variables
which are produced from atomic variables via the grammar’s algebra.
The data physicalisation algebra dictates the possible sets, rules and
operators over physicalisations and defines the set of possible operators
between physicalisations. It is an open research question whether it is
possible to apply all existing operators (e.g. unary and binary) to physicalisations or whether we have to define a subset of these operators. An
advantage of dynamic data physicalisation is that new direct forms of
interactions for the exploration and analysis of the underlying data are
supported. Similar to Ishii’s interactions for programmable matter [7],
we therefore plan to define a set of possible interactions (e.g. squeezing
or weighting) over physicalisations. These interactions can be atomic
but the data physicalisation grammar’s algebra should also enable the
production of more complex interactions out of the atomic ones. Note
that the data physicalisation grammar forms the foundation for our
data-driven approach for data physicalisation and the corresponding
software framework.
2.3

Design Guidelines

Similar to Bertin’s [2] work for information visualisation, we are developing a systematic catalogue to help designers in choosing the right
physical variables and combination of modalities when designing interactions for their data physicalisations. Our general guidelines for
the new field of dynamic data physicalisation will include some formal
design guidelines in terms of which physical variables and data physicalisations can be used for what type of data. In addition to these data
physicalisation design guidelines, one also has to investigate guidelines
for the interaction with data physicalisations and how to best combine
different physical and digital variables for input as well as output in

order to provide an effective human-information interaction. The definition of these design and interaction guidelines is tightly coupled to
our framework’s data physicalisation grammar and the guidelines are
systematically evaluated for their perceptual effectiveness via a growing set of dynamic data physicalisation use cases that are implemented
based the proposed dynamic data physicalisation software framework.
3

D ISCUSSION

AND

C ONCLUSION

The proposed framework for dynamic data physicalisation is going
to serve different user groups. First of all, the grammar for dynamic
data physicalisation represents a formalisation of the supported physical variables and instructions as well as their potential combinations
and might foster the discussion within and across different research
communities—including data physicalisation, human-computer interaction (HCI) or tangible, embedded and embodied interaction—about
fundamental forms of data physicalisation interactions. Note that the
grammar is expected to evolve over time based on new insights by
the research community about possible physical variables and their
potential combinations to form new dynamic data physicalisations.
Researchers and developers of new output devices for dynamic
data physicalisations can also profit from the presented dynamic data
physicalisation framework since they get immediate access to different
existing datasets as well as the entire processing and generation of physical device-independent output by only having to implement a software
driver for their new data physicalisation output devices. Of course also
data scientists and knowledge workers could profit by having access
to innovative interfaces for the exploration and interaction with highdimensional datasets which might help to improve their efficiency and
insights while exploring and analysing rich multi-dimensional datasets.
Our data-driven approach with a grammar specifying the mappings
of data to physical variables and their possible combinations to form
more complex data physicalisations might further guide data scientists
when creating dynamic data physicalisations and thereby foster the
gain of knowledge through systematic study [4]. Existing interactive
clustering approaches in the data science research field might profit
from new interfaces making use of dynamic data physicalisation in
order to not only make the decision making more accurate, but also
more user-friendly and enjoyable for data workers. Note that different
forms of data physicalisation are often also used in art installations for
transporting messages about potentially complex datasets and facts to a
larger audience or to enable post-WIMP interactions with these physical
installations. The proposed framework for dynamic data physicalisation might support artists in building new forms of tangible multi-user
interfaces (e.g. as seen in the ArtVis [5] project for digital output only)
and provide them access to the latest findings on how to combine various physical variables, the best forms of multimodal interactions as
well as recent developments regarding output devices for dynamic data
physicalisation.
It is important to stress that we are interested in a conceptual as well
as software framework for dynamic data physicalisation that enables
the experimentation and definition of fundamental guidelines for data
physicalisation. In our vision-driven research approach we thereby
ignore the fact that the necessary technology for some of the proposed
physicalisations might not yet be available, and already want to investigate new forms of interactions that might be supported by new
forms of data physicalisation output devices in the near future. We
strongly believe that, similar to the field of information visualisation
and the work of Bertin [2], there is a need for fundamental research
on dynamic data physicalisation design guidelines for the representation of higher-dimensional datasets and that the presented dynamic
data physicalisation framework can serve as a common ground and
communication platform (e.g. via the formalised data physicalisation
grammar for data-driven physicalisations) for researchers and developers working on these design and interaction guidelines. By presenting
and discussing our proposal and current work on a framework for dynamic data physicalisation with the scientific community, we hope
to establish a working group who might be interested in contributing
to the idea of a formal data physicalisation grammar and a dynamic

data physicalisation software framework that can serve as a research
platform for the experimentation and evaluation of emerging forms of
dynamic data physicalisation.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Alexander, Y. Jansen, K. Hornbæk, J. Kildal, and A. Karnik. Exploring
the Challenges of Making Data Physical. In Proceedings of CHI EA 2005.
Seoul, Republic of Korea, April 2015. doi: 10.1145/2702613.2702659
[2] J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps. Esri Press,
January 2011.
[3] A. Cuttone, M. K. Petersen, and J. E. Larsen. Four Data Visualization
Heuristics to Facilitate Reflection in Personal Informatics. In Proceedings
of UAHCI 2014. Heraklion, Greece, June 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319
-07509-9 51
[4] V. Dhar. Data Science and Prediction. Communications of the ACM,
56(12), December 2013. doi: 10.1145/2500499
[5] B. Dumas, B. Moerman, S. Trullemans, and B. Signer. ArtVis: Combining Advanced Visualisation and Tangible Interaction for the Exploration,
Analysis and Browsing of Digital Artwork Collections. In Proceedings of
AVI 2014. Como, Italy, May 2014. doi: 10.1145/2598153.2598159
[6] T. Hogan and E. Hornecker. Towards a Design Space for Multisensory
Data Representation. Interacting with Computers, 29(2), May 2016. doi:
10.1093/iwc/iww015
[7] H. Ishii, D. Lakatos, L. Bonanni, and J.-B. Labrune. Radical Atoms:
Beyond Tangible Bits, Toward Transformable Materials. interactions,
19(1), January 2012. doi: 10.1145/2065327.2065337
[8] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, and J.-D. Fekete. Evaluating the Efficiency of
Physical Visualizations. In Proceedings of CHI 2013. Paris, France, April
2013. doi: 10.1145/2470654.2481359
[9] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, P. Isenberg, J. Alexander, A. Karnik, J. Kildal,
S. Subramanian, and K. Hornbæk. Opportunities and Challenges for Data
Physicalization. In Proceedings of CHI 2015. Seoul, Republic of Korea,
April 2015. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702180
[10] J. Mackinlay. Automating the Design of Graphical Presentations of Relational Information. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 5(2), April
1986. doi: 10.1145/22949.22950
[11] A. V. Moere. Beyond the Tyranny of the Pixel: Exploring the Physicality
of Information Visualization. In Proceedings of IV 2008. London, UK,
July 2008. doi: 10.1109/IV.2008.84
[12] A. V. Moere and S. Patel. The Physical Visualization of Information:
Designing Data Sculptures in an Educational Context. In Proceedings
of VINCI 2009. Sydney, Australia, September 2009. doi: 10.1007/978-1
-4419-0312-9 1
[13] S. Paneels and J. C. Roberts. Review of Designs for Haptic Data Visualization. IEEE Transactions on Haptics, 3(2), April 2010. doi: 10.1109/TOH.
2009.44
[14] J. C. Roberts and R. Walker. Using All Our Senses: The Need for a
Unified Theoretical Approach to Multi-sensory Information Visualization.
In Proceedings of VisWeek 2010. Salt Lake City, USA, October 2010.
[15] D. Schmandt-Besserat. Before Writing: Volume 1: From Counting to
Cuneiform. University of Texas Press, December 1992.
[16] P. Search. Interactive Multisensory Data Representation. In Proceedings
of DUXU 2015. Los Angeles, USA, 2015. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-20898
-5 35
[17] B. Signer and T. J. Curtin. Tangible Holograms: Towards Mobile Physical
Augmentation of Virtual Objects. Technical Report WISE-2017-01, WISE
Lab, March 2017.
[18] S. Swaminathan, C. Shi, Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, L. A. Oehlberg, and J.-D.
Fekete. Supporting the Design and Fabrication of Physical Visualizations.
In Proceedings of CHI 2014. Toronto, Canada, April 2014. doi: 10.1145/
2556288.2557310
[19] F. Taher, Y. Jansen, J. Woodruff, J. Hardy, K. Hornbæk, and J. Alexande.
Investigating the Use of a Dynamic Physical Bar Chart for Data Exploration and Presentation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 23(1), January 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598498
[20] B. Ullmer and H. Ishii. Emerging Frameworks for Tangible User Interfaces.
IBM Systems Journal, 39(3–4), July 2000. doi: 10.1147/sj.393.0915
[21] L. Wilkinson. The Grammar of Graphics. Springer, July 2005. doi: 10.
1007/0-387-28695-0
[22] W. Willett, Y. Jansen, and P. Dragicevic. Embedded Data Representations. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(1),
January 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598608

