Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

Beyond Physical Bar Charts –
An Exploration of Designing
Physical Visualizations
Simon Stusak

Ayfer Aslan

Abstract

Universtiy of Munich (LMU)

Universtiy of Munich (LMU)

Human-Computer-Interaction

Human-Computer-Interaction

Group

Group

Amalienstraße 17

Amalienstraße 17

80333 Munich, Germany

80333 Munich, Germany

simon.stusak@ifi.lmu.de

ayfer.aslan@campus.lmu.de

Physical visualizations only recently started to attract
attention from the InfoVis and HCI communities. They
are well known to encourage playful exploration and to
stimulate curiosity, but are also considered to support
analytical information visualization tasks. However,
creating effective and usable physical visualizations has
not been explored in much detail. In this work, we
present our early approaches and experiences in
designing and building novel physical visualizations. We
started with sketches on paper, created first low fidelity
prototypes out of cardboard and built the final
visualizations with thread, acrylic glass and a laser
cutter. An initial user study was conducted to
investigate if basic information retrieval tasks can be
accomplished with our physical visualizations and how
users interact with them.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
CHI 2014, Apr 26 - May 01, 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada.
ACM 978-1-4503-2474-8/14/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2581311

Author Keywords
Design Process; Physical Visualization; Information
Visualization; Tangible User Interfaces

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Design

1381

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

Introduction

Figure 1. Layered flowers
represent countries, its petals
different topics.

Physical Visualizations (PVs) are visualizations in which
data is mapped to a physical form [2]. Artists and
designers have produced a large variety of physical
representations of data and companies already used
them in the early 20th century [1]. They are used to
convey messages beyond the data itself and can
engage people to reflect on its meaning [5]. While
these benefits are widely recognized, their analytical
value and the creation of effective PVs remain to be
explored.

Figure 2. Sketch of a rotary disk.
By rotating parts of the physical
visualization the displayed countries
or dimensions can be changed.

In this paper we describe our design process which is
inspired by rapid prototyping techniques such as paper
prototyping. We believe that using basic materials (e.g.
paper and cardboard) in the initial design steps has
advantages over digital fabrication tools. The use of
laser cutters and 3D printers is still more time
consuming, expensive and produce a lot of waste.
Furthermore access to these tools is needed as well as
a lot of experience to receive good results. In contrast
paper and cardboard can be easily processed further
with common tools such as pencils, scissors or glue,
which are well-known and accessible to everybody.

different degrees of ‘data physicality’ which vary in the
level of abstraction of how data is mapped and
perceived by human senses. He argues that PVs can
represent information in pleasant ways and turn data
analysis in an engaging and educational experience.
The first study that evaluated the efficiency of physical
visualizations was conducted by Jansen et al. [2]. This
study compared physical 3D bar charts to their onscreen 2D and 3D counterparts. The physical touch and
the perfect visual realism of physical objects seem to
be an essential cognitive aid for information retrieval
tasks. They point out that further research is needed
and that recommendations for designing effective
visualizations are necessary.
Jansen et al. [3] presented an interaction model for
beyond-desktop visualizations. They describe a
modified information visualization pipeline in which raw
data is processed into a visualization and then rendered
into the physical world.

Designing Physical Visualizations
In the following we will discuss our design process. We
describe our early steps, in which we sketched ideas
and built low fidelity prototypes out of paper and
cardboard. Furthermore we present our final designs
and the results of a conducted focus group.

In addition we present an initial user study in which we
evaluated two physical visualizations against two digital
visualizations to investigate if basic information
visualization retrieval tasks can be accomplished. We
collected qualitative data through questionnaires, semistructured interviews and observations during the
study.

Dataset
To reduce the possible design space we focused on one
dataset for the entire design process. We used the
Better Life Index1 dataset published by the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). This index allows the comparison

Related Work
Figure 3. Low fidelity prototype of
the layered flowers.

The most common type of PVs are data sculptures. The
physicality of information visualization was extensively
explored by Vande Moere [5,6,7], who introduced

1

http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/

1382

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

of well-being across countries, based on eleven
dimensions such as health, income or education. The
higher the values in each dimensions the better the
country ranks on the scale. We chose this dataset as it
is easy to understand and seemed an interesting topic
for users to analyze.

Figure 4. Low fidelity prototype of
the thread star plot.

Figure 5. “Middle” fidelity
prototype of the rotary disk.

Sketches
To avoid concentrating too much on external influences
such as material or size, we started by sketching
different ideas on paper.
Figure 1 shows an example that is inspired by the
Better Life Index website and its interactive
visualization, where the countries are represented by
flowers and the dimensions by petals. By laying flowers
in a physical form on top of another a comparison of
the countries and dimensions is possible. The flowers
could be fixated in the middle by a screw to enable
rotation. Using magnets instead of a screw would allow
an easy disassembling and reassembling.
The idea of a rotary disk is shown in Figure 2, which is
inspired by traditional interactive visualizations and
their controls to e.g. change the view. By rotating or
sliding parts of the PV it would be possible to change
the displayed countries or dimensions. The primary
goal in this approach was to evoke users’ fascination
and curiosity through playful exploration of the dataset.

Figure 6. Two variations of the
thread star plot prototype.

Low Fidelity Prototyping
To get a first impression of the realization and handling
of the prototypes we built various examples with basic
materials such as paper and cardboard.
Figure 3 shows the above mentioned idea of the
layered flowers. To order the petals according to the

different dimensions we used color instead of labeling
them. In this early stage of prototyping the problem of
occlusion from small petals by larger petals was already
obvious.
Figure 4 shows the first approaches of a thread star
plot. The idea was to use bar charts and star plots,
both well-known 2D visualizations, and combine them
into one compact physical object. Each of four
orthogonal arranged layers represents the values of a
dimension of various countries by a bar chart. A thread
connects the four dimensions of the same country and
forms a star plot for each.
“Middle” Fidelity Prototyping
To create more sophisticated prototypes we used
transparent acrylic glass and a laser cutter, which
enables rapid fabrication with high precision.
Our approach of a rotary disk is shown in figure 5. Two
disks with the same size and different cut gaps are
combined with screws, which in addition serve as
markers for the data points. We did not pursue with
this prototype as even small datasets are difficult to
display due to overlapping gaps on one disk. In addition
the screws often twisted and prevented easy rotating.
Further developments of the thread star plot are
presented in figure 6. The top picture shows the initial
idea built with transparent acrylic glass, where the bar
charts and its labeling are carved. We experimented
with the thickness and the size of the acrylic glass to
find a good compromise between stability and handling.
The prototype had no interactive parts so far. To enable
filtering and reordering we tried various techniques to
add and remove countries from the prototype. Important
characteristics for the assembling are the stability once

1383

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

the different parts are connected but also easy handling
in separating and joining the parts. The most promising
solution was to attach hook-and-loop fastener at the
edges of the acrylic glass. To facilitate the reassembling
with the right orientation we colored the bars according
to their dimension (see figure 6 bottom).

plot or a bar chart view on the right, dependent on the
selection made in the matrix view (see figure 7). In
addition to the static digital visualization (DS) the
interactive digital visualizations (DI) enabled filtering and
reordering of the countries.
Tasks

Figure 7. Screenshots of the digital
visualizations used for the
evaluation.

Focus Group
To get some early feedback regarding our first
prototypes we conducted a focus group with six
computer science students. After a general discussion
about PVs we presented our visualizations. Both the
flower and the rotary disk prototype were rated
negatively. Common statements were that they were
“too confusing”, “difficult to understand” and “hard to get
any insights from”. Both variations of the thread star plot
prototype were perceived positively. It is “easy to
understand” and “the handling/size is suitable”.
Furthermore the participants liked the idea of
disassembling and reassembling the countries with the
interactive prototype.

First Evaluation

Figure 8. The hardware setup that
was used for the evaluation.

The goal of our first evaluation was to investigate how
people interact with our PV. Furthermore we were
interested in how well basic information retrieval tasks
could be accomplished in comparison to 2D on-screen
visualizations. The study was inspired by Jansen et al.
[2].
Visualizations
We compared four different visualizations. The two
variations of the thread star plot (physical static (PS),
physical interactive (PI)), described in the previous
section and two 2D on-screen visualizations. The digital
visualizations displayed a matrix on the left, and a star

The participants were asked to complete the following
five tasks:
1.

Which country has the highest value in
[dimension]?

2.

Order all countries descending by [dimension].

3.

Order [four given countries] descending by
[dimension].

4.

Rank [four given countries] descending by all given
dimensions.

5.

Which are the countries with the highest and lowest
values regarding all dimensions?

Procedure
Each participant completed an initial training phase in
which each task was practiced, followed by an
exploration phase to get familiar with the four
visualizations. Participants were asked to complete all
five tasks for each visualization. The input and output
of the instructions, the tasks and their responses were
done on a separate touch tablet. Participants were
instructed to be as accurate and as fast as possible.
Hardware Setup
The experimental setup with a laptop, a computer mouse
and a separate tablet is shown in figure 8. The PVs were
only present during the relevant condition.

1384

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

Measures
The task completion time (interval between the press on
“start” and the press on “done”) as well as the error rate
were recorded. All errors were normalized between 0
and 1.
Participants
16 participants (6 female) took part in our study. Age
ranged between 13 and 41 years (mean age 25). Eight
were computer science students, 2 pupils and 6
employees. All were right handed, 2 had experience in
information visualization.
Design
A Latin square design was used for the presentation
order of the visualizations. The order of the four (TODO)
datasets and questions were kept constant. The main
factor was visualization (digital static, digital interactive,
physical static, physical interactive) and the secondary
factor was task.

Figure 9. Average task completion
time in seconds per visualization
(digital static (DS), digital
interactive (DI), physical static
(PS), physical interactive (PI)) and
task (error bars: 95% confidence
interval).

Hypotheses
Based on the results of the experiment done by Jansen
et al. [2] we expect that the digital visualizations
outperform the physical ones. As tasks 4 and 5 require
the use of the entire displayed data, we assume a minor
difference since the PVs provide a particularly good
overview.

Results
Aside from the measurements of time and error we
describe in this section our observations during the study
and the feedback given by users through a questionnaire
and a semi-structured interview.

Time and Error
A repeated measure ANOVA did not reveal a significant
effect of neither visualization (F(3,45) = 2.781, p = .052)
nor of task (F(4,60) = 1.996, p =.107) on the error rate.
Contrary to our assumptions a repeated measure ANOVA
did not reveal an effect of visualization (F(3,45) = 1.429, p
= .247) on task completion time. Only the task had a
significant effect on task completion time (F(4,60) =
31.271, p < .001). All task completion time measures
were log-transformed to correct for skewness [4].
Reported means are antilogged and indicate geometric
means [4]. Figure 9 summarizes the average task
completion time per visualization and task. Only task 1
shows a noticeable separation between the digital and
the PVs. The static digital visualizations perform best in
all tasks.
User Feedback
When asked to rank techniques according to preference
the digital interactive visualization was ranked 13 times
at position one. We furthermore collected subjective data
through questionnaires using 5-point Likert scales
ranging from 1 (“strongly agree”) to 5 (“strongly
disagree”). Participants had the impression that the
tasks were most easily fulfilled with the digital interactive
visualization (digital interactive: median=1, all others:
median=2). It was easier to interact with the digital
variations than with the physical ones (both digital:
median=1, both physical: median=2). This corresponds
with participants’ statements that the PVs are more
complicated to understand than the digital ones. In
addition the holding and turning of the PVs was
mentioned as laborious. The physical static visualization
aided the completion of the tasks less than the other
visualizations (physical static: median=2, all others:
median=1). Both interactive visualizations were more

1385

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

interesting to interact with (physical interactive:
median=1, digital interactive: median=1.5, both static:
median=2).
Observations
We observed differences between subjects in the ways in
which they used and interacted with the PVs. Seven
participants constantly used only one hand to interact
with the physical static visualizations, but all participants
used both hands to interact with the interactive one.
Four participants did not disassemble the interactive
visualization, 2 because it seemed impractical, 2 because
of fear to break something. Often the participants were
too cautious at the beginning to undo the hook-and-loop
fastener. However, one participant broke several parts of
the physical interactive prototype while trying to
demount it.

Discussion and Future Work
Our design process shows that the use of simple
material such as paper or cardboard and common tools
such as pencils and scissors to build PVs can have
advantages. In an early stage it is possible to identify
problems regarding the design and get a good
impression about size and interaction possibilities.
Limitations are stability and the general haptic
characteristics, dependent on the material the final PV
will be made of. The user study revealed that a mature
design is crucial if the PVs are aimed at supporting
analytical tasks. Especially stability and affordances are
essential properties.

Our next step is to develop a prototyping toolkit, which
includes different materials and tools to build PVs. We
would like to present and evaluate this toolkit during
various workshops. We are also planning to build more
sophisticated PVs, possibly involving mechanical
constructions, elastic parts or even liquids. Although
the PVs we discuss here are only specific instances of a
much larger design space, we hope to provide a solid
starting point for a discussion on how to design
effective physical visualizations.

References
[1]

Dragicevic, P. and Jansen, Y. List of Physical
Visualizations. http://www.tinyurl.com/physvis.
Online, accessed 06-Dec-2013.

[2]

Jansen, Y., Dragicevic, P. and Fekete, J.-D.
Evaluating the Efficiency of Physical Visualizations.
CHI (2013), 2593-2602.

[3]

Jansen, Y., and Dragicevic, P. An Interaction Model
for Visualizations Beyond the Desktop. IEEE TVCG
(2013), 2396-2405.

[4]

Sauro, J. and Lewis, R. Average task times in
usability tests: what to report? CHI (2010), 23472350.

[5]

Vande Moere, A. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel:
Exploring the physicality of information
visualization. IV (2008), 469-474.

[6]

Vande Moere, A. and Patel, S. Analyzing the design
approaches of physical data sculptures in a design
education context. VINCI (2009).

[7]

Zhao, J. and Vande Moere, A. Embodiment in data
sculpture: a model of the physical visualization of
information. DIMEA (2008), 343-350.

1386

