Activity Sculptures:
Exploring the Impact of Physical Visualizations on Running Activity
Simon Stusak, Aurélien Tabard, Franziska Sauka, Rohit Ashok Khot, Andreas Butz

Fig. 1. Four Activity Sculptures of running activity: a figure, a necklace, a lamp and a jar. The sculptures are extensible by additional
pieces, and each individual piece represents a specific run.
Abstract—Data sculptures are a promising type of visualizations in which data is given a physical form. In the past, they have
mostly been used for artistic, communicative or educational purposes, and designers of data sculptures argue that in such situations,
physical visualizations can be more enriching than pixel-based visualizations. We present the design of Activity Sculptures: data
sculptures of running activity. In a three-week field study we investigated the impact of the sculptures on 14 participants’ running
activity, the personal and social behaviors generated by the sculptures, as well as participants’ experiences when receiving these
individual physical tokens generated from the specific data of their runs. The physical rewards generated curiosity and personal
experimentation but also social dynamics such as discussion on runs or envy/competition. We argue that such passive (or calm)
visualizations can complement nudging and other mechanisms of persuasion with a more playful and reflective look at ones’ activity.
Index Terms—Physical Visualizations, Activity Sculptures, Physical Activity, Data Sculptures, Behavioral Change

1

I NTRODUCTION

Physical visualizations use specifically shaped objects to give abstract
data a concrete physical form. Vande Moere argues that the tangible
nature of physical objects conveys messages beyond the data itself,
encourages people to reflect on its meaning, and provides a more enjoyable and engaging experience [41]. These promising properties of
physical visualizations have been explored in various settings, including art installations, scientific experiments and education [36].
This research focused mostly on the representation of generic data.
• Simon Stusak is with University of Munich (LMU).
E-mail: simon.stusak@ifi.lmu.de.
• Aurélien Tabard is with Université de Lyon & CNRS.
Université Lyon 1, LIRIS, UMR5205, F-69622, France
E-mail: aurelien.tabard@univ-lyon1.fr.
• Franziska Sauka is with University of Munich (LMU).
E-mail: sauka@cip.ifi.lmu.de.
• Rohit Ashok Khot is with Exertion Games Lab, RMIT University.
E-mail: rohit@exertiongameslab.org.
• Andreas Butz is with University of Munich (LMU).
E-mail: andreas.butz@ifi.lmu.de.
Manuscript received 31 Mar. 2014; accepted 1 Aug. 2014; date of
publication xx xxx 2014; date of current version xx xxx 2014.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.

We are interested in investigating the impact of physical visualizations
of personal data. Indeed Khot et al. recently showed that physicality of
personal data visualizations [20] can provide additional benefits such
as strengthening emotional connections. These preliminary results are
promising but did not focus on the long term impact (both positive and
negative) of physical visualizations. The question of long term impact
is particularly relevant given the nature of physical visualizations as
long lasting and “always on” objects. In this paper, we present a threeweek field study, in which we investigated how physical visualizations
of personal running activity changed participants’ running behaviors.
Sport is a domain in which physical tokens such as medals or cups
are already widely used as material rewards. In similar spirit, we designed Activity Sculptures, a family of physical visualizations with the
purpose of fostering comparison, reflection and communication about
running activity. In our work, the data from every run is processed
to create a unique piece, which becomes part of a larger sculpture (see
figure 1). This fabrication process is based on a web pipeline we developed for fetching and transforming participants’ running data in order
to produce the physical visualization parts.
We evaluated the concept of Activity Sculptures with 14 participants in a three-week field study. We were particularly interested in
comparing the different types of sculptures and their respective impact on participants. Moreover, since existing research in technologysupported behavioral change shows that feedback and (digital) visualizations of past activity can increase current physical activity, we
aimed at detecting whether the same effects would come into play with
physical visualizations, or which other dynamics would emerge.

2 R ELATED W ORK
Over the past decade, technological solutions have been proposed to
foster change in people’s behavior, from decreasing energy consumption to increasing physical activity. Such solutions are motivated by
the social challenges our societies are facing from widespread medical conditions, to environmental change. While focusing on physical
activity we ground our work in the research on behavioral change, but
also consider criticisms to this approach.
2.1 From Lifelogging to Quantified Self
Artists and scientists have used tools such as notebooks to track and
reflect on their activity before computers were ever available. As personal informatics gained importance at the end of 1990’s, a number of
self-tracking projects emerged. The MyLifeBits project is a prominent
example of these experiments [13]: Gordon Bell and his colleagues
from Microsoft Research recorded and organized large amounts of his
personal data. Starting with computer based data [11], lifelogging prototypes incorporated an increasing number of sensor data [3], in order
to augment personal memory. One of the conclusions of these experiments was that capture and reflection on personal activity could have
the most impact on areas of health and well-being [21]. This led to
the recent emergence of the Quantified Self movement [38], an “international collaboration of users and makers of self-tracking tools”1 .
The movement aims at making sense of personal data from spending
habits, to stress or physical activity, often with the underlying goal of
self-improvement.
2.2 Motivating Physical Activity
Tracking and motivational applications often ground their design on
behavioral psychology [7, 12], with the hypothesis that immediate
contextual feedback can promote behavioral change [22]. While recent sensing technology2 has made activity tracking and contextual
feedback much easier, the main challenges to behavioral change remain human ones, i.e. helping people reach their goals and maintain the changes over time [2]. Behavioral and social theories offer
a wealth of strategies to support change. These include the promotion
of gradual changes in individuals’ behavior (e.g., with the transtheoretical model [14]) or mechanisms for sustaining the changes over time.
Through a thorough review of the literature, Consolvo et al. identified
the following strategies [7]:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.
8.

use abstraction, rather than raw sensor data to foster reflection;
be controllable, by letting people set their own goals [24];
show trends, for users to relate past efforts to the goals they set;
be positive, positive reinforcement encourages change [8]; negative feedback or punishment are not effective motivators [23];
be comprehensive, by not limiting feedback and rewards to what
can be sensed, but account for other positive behaviors that were
not captured by the system [6];
be aesthetic, by displaying information in a comfortable and
attractive manner; this can increase enjoyment and engagement [10];
be unobstrusive, by collecting data without interrupting users
and presenting it when needed;
be public, allow sharing [26] as well as social influences through
family participation [25].

In the design we present next, we used these strategies as guidelines,
as they provide powerful motivators and can impact behavior even
without people noticing. E.g., the field study of twinkly lights [29]
showed that ambient information could transform the way people behave without them being aware of it, in this case, taking stairs rather
than the elevator.
Nonetheless, many other factors besides psychological elements
contribute to lifestyle improvements. For instance Munson showed
1 http://quantifiedself.com/about/
2 From mobile apps (RunKeeper, Nike+ Running, Endomondo, Runtastic),
to wearables devices (e.g. Jawbone, Misfit Shine, Fitbit, Nike+ fuelband, Withings Pulse)

that digital rewards do not motivate inherently [26] which raises questions about how such rewards should be designed. More importantly
behavioral change systems often coincide with norms and visions of
ideal behaviors embedded into their design [30]. Rather than nudging or persuading users into a specific behavior, more positive strategies might aim at changing attitudes (rather than behaviors), fostering mindfulness and leaving room for stories [28], or moving beyond
the individual [5, 9]. As suggested by Yetim [40] seeing persuasion
as a communicative act can enable designers to promote discussion
“on the intent of persuasion and the strategies chosen to achieve the
desired attitude and/or behavior change”, thereby avoiding an overly
rational model of human behavior criticized by many [5, 28]. In this
article, we investigate how physical visualizations can foster reflection
and communication on physical activity, but also a playful rather than
utilitarian relationship to physical activity.
2.3

Casual Infovis

Visualizations for reflection and playfulness depart from traditional
information visualization which has historically investigated analytical tasks conducted by experts. Such visualizations often differ from
desktop-centric applications to provide a more personal or shared experience, through mobile applications3 , ambient visualizations conveying lightweight information in the background [32], social ones
[39], informative art [37], or even on wearables [1]. Pousman et al.
framed this as Casual Infovis or “the use of computer mediated tools to
depict personally meaningful information in visual ways that support
everyday users in both everyday work and non-work situations” [27].
Our project investigates a specific type of casual visualization in which
pixels are replaced by physical objects.
2.4

Physical Visualizations

Compared to traditional digital visualizations, which map data to pixels or ink, physical visualization map data onto a physical form [18].
Jansen et al. [17] extended the information visualization pipeline
model with an interaction model for beyond-desktop visualizations to
describe the process from raw data to a visualization to the rendering in the physical world. When designing a physical visualization,
three aspects have to be considered, i.e. the design goals, the aesthetic
features and the assembly / manufacturing features [34].
While physical visualizations can serve analytical purposes [33],
we are more interested in making data exploration an intriguing and
memorable experience. Vande Moere argues that data sculptures have
the potential to encourage people to reflect on the meaning of the data
and thereby change their behavior [35].
One example for this kind of data sculptures is Breakaway by Jafarinaimi et al. [16], which reflects the form of the human body through
its shape and movement. It communicates in a non-obtrusive manner how long a user has been sitting on a chair. The data is gathered
through sensors placed on the chair. Khot et al. [19] designed a system
called SweatAtoms, which transforms the physical activity data based
on heart rate into five different 3D printed material artifacts. The evaluation of the system in six households for two weeks revealed that
participants’ relationship to physical activity can be affected by physical representations.
This paper complements/differs from their approach in the following ways: 1) Broader study: We conduct a study with more participants (14 vs. 7) and for a longer duration. 2) Different data: We
focus on running activity, not everyday physical activity. We visualize
a larger number of variables (running time, distance, speed, duration,
elevation gain) rather relying solely on heart rate data. This allow us
to study how participants interpret these data mappings. 3) Different
design strategies: We also explore alternate designs in which physical
objects add to each other, leading to bigger objects. As a result, users
can easily see and compare their progress through these artefacts as a
continuum of their physical activity. 4) Focus on social dynamics: We
also investigate the affect of physical visualization on social dynamics by deliberately choosing study participants who know each other.
3 http://mobilev.is/

Fig. 2. Sketches of eight early concepts that where used in the brainstorming session and for the online questionnaire.

We aim to understand whether such physical representations can foster communication, competition, envy among participants which could
further aid in the motivation for physical activity. 5) Off-site printing:
We investigate how the production and reception of physical visualization impacts participants. In our case, participants directly receive
artifacts (like rewards) rather than printing themselves.
Finally, several commercial services offer the creation of physical
artifacts based on the data of the user. Loci4 for example is a series of
3D printed sculptures of ones’ flight paths. The web service Meshu.io5
generates jewelry based on the travel data of the users. The data can be
entered manually or users can allow the service access to their social
media data. After selecting the material and the fabrication technique
the object is remotely fabricated and mailed to the user.
3

D ESIGNING ACTIVITY S CULPTURES

This section describes the design and the fabrication process of the Activity Sculptures. Based on our literature review, a brainstorming session and an online survey we explored various concepts (see figure 2),
which we then refined into four types of sculptures. We developed a
fabrication process leveraging web technologies to fetch running data,
and generated 3D models which could then be printed.
3.1

Design Process

Our first step was to define the space within which we would design
Activity Sculptures. We organized a Brainstorming Webs [15] session
with five colleagues (graduate students) to discuss ideas what such Activity Sculptures could look like and to specify which characteristics
they should meet. Their ideas were later refined through a review of
the literature presented above. We also presented our initial directions
to the wider public through an online survey (47 participants).
3.1.1

Initial Design Directions

Based on the brainstorming session, previous discussions and the literature, we identified a set of design principles, categorized in three
main design directions:
• Reflection: sculptures should support self-reflection more than
comparison; should display intermediate goals and stages; ought
to reflect met and unmet goals; should always stay within sight.
• Motivation: sculptures should constantly support motivation and
feedback; should display good and bad performances.
• Form: should only look aesthetically pleasing if good performances were achieved; should serve some kind of practical purpose; should be modifiable and variable.
4 http://vimeo.com/64390930
5 http://meshu.io/

We explored these directions through eight concepts (see figure 2)
including a lamp, a jar, a picture frame, a modular sculpture and an engraved sculpture. Apart from these abstract concepts we also included
classical visualizations such as bar charts or stacked line graphs.
3.1.2

Online survey

To assess our initial directions, we conducted an online survey. We
collected answers from 47 participants (57% were female and 43%
male) between 23 and 50 years old.
The majority of respondents (35) stated that they would like to have
sculptures of physical activity. For 75% of the respondents the visibility of their own data was more important than the possibility to
compare their performances with other runners. To see all activities
including “bad” performances was favored by 70% (21% were not interested in viewing “bad” performances).
Respondents considered the motivational potential of physical representations positively, with 34% (16) perceiving a very good opportunity and nearly half (23) thinking that it could motivate them a little.
The majority (32) considered the motivational aspects of physical visualizations of running activity positive.
However, motivation should not be considered the only purpose of
the sculptures, while 23 respondents considered an increase in motivation as important, 14 preferred sculptures supporting self-reflection,
9 artwork pieces, and 20 participants preferred a mixture of all three
purposes. These preferences were reflected in the types of sculpture
the respondents preferred: aesthetic and extensible sculptures. The
lamp was rated best, followed by the jar, the picture frame, the sculpture with engraving and the modular sculpture. The more conventional
visualizations, i.e. stacked line graphs and bar charts were ranked lowest.
Participants stated that they would prefer longer periods of time between receiving sculptures: 19 participants preferred to receive sculptures when reaching pre-established goals and 11 chose the option of
receiving one sculpture per month. Only a few (5) participants wanted
a sculpture for every run.
Overall, the survey outlined interesting directions: appreciation for
the concept of Activity Sculptures, interest in the motivational potential of the sculptures but also in the reflective and aesthetic aspects of
the sculptures. This is particularly evident when looking at the ranking of the sculptures. The slow pace at which participants expected to
receive sculptures reveals the importance of excitement and contemplation over instant feedback and quantitative comparison.
3.2

Design Decisions

Based on this initial feedback, we decided to focus on sculptures of
an abstract nature and which support self-reflection. We aimed at creating aesthetically pleasing sculptures that would not seek constant
attention. Comprehensibility and direct readability of the exact data
at the first glance was secondary since participants used the sculptures

for a longer time. We decided to make the sculptures modular, rewarding each running session with a piece of the sculpture. The pieces add
up to make a whole, as a means to promote regular physical activities.
While the feedback from our survey indicated a slower update rate, we
decided on producing one piece after every run to reach the evaluation
of the concepts after about one month.
Of all concepts explored, we retained three which fit best our design directions: lamp, jar, figure. We further added a necklace sculpture (see fig. 2). The introduction of this concept seemed interesting
for investigating the potential of self-expression. As a sculpture that
predominantly appealed to women it also served as a fitting contrast
to the robot-shaped figure sculpture (which was preferred by men in
our survey). Both the necklace and the figure tended to be decorative
pieces whereas the jar and the lamp had a practical purpose.
All sculptures had in common that the size of the single parts increased with better performances. The performance also influenced
their form, going from an angular and sharp appearance to appearing
smoother and in our opinion more aesthetically pleasing. For every
sculpture the average speed, duration and distance was used as the underlying data, because they were the most popular in the online questionnaire. The lamp also included elevation gain and the figure calorie
consumption. This was decided in order to investigate whether additional variables can have an impact, e.g. on motivational aspects. As
all sculptures represent running data they can be used for self-reflection
and may catch one’s attention (depending on where the participants
placed them). The figure and lamp clearly showed met and unmet
goals. Missing pieces could be noticed easily, increasing motivation.
With each run represented by a piece, feedback is provided after every
run.
3.2.1

3.2.4

Necklace

The necklace (see figure 3 right) is composed of an undefined number
of beads, each representing one run. The beads can be added to a
chain, and the size of a bead indicates the duration of a run. The shape
of a bead depends on the average running speed affecting the number
of width segments and the distance covered visible in the number of
height segments.

NUMBER OF
HEIGHT SEGMETS
Distance

DIAMETER
Duration

DIAMETER
Duration

DIAMETER
Average Speed

PATHWAY
Elevation Gain

NUMBER OF
HEIGHT SEGMETS
Distance

NUMBER OF
WIDTH SEGMENTS
Average Speed

Fig. 3. Digital 3D models of a layer of the jar sculpture (left) and a bead
of the necklace sculpture (right).

3.2.3

Lamp

The lamp (see figure 4 left) is composed of ten pillars, each representing one run. Each pillar can be plugged into a dedicated hole at the

SCOPE
Distance
NUMBER OF
HEIGHT SEGMENTS
Average Speed

NUMBER OF
WIDTH SEGMENTS
Distance

HEIGHT
Duration

NUMBER OF
HEIGHT SEGMETS
Duration
NUMBER OF
WIDTH SEGMENTS
Calorie Consumption

Fig. 4. Digital 3D models of a pillar of the lamp sculpture (left) and
several parts of the figure sculpture (right).

3.2.5

Extensibility of the Sculptures

All the sculptures consisted of parts which can be assembled, enabling
the extension of the sculptures. We anticipated that producing regular feedback (a piece per run) would uphold users’ interest, as well
as maintain motivation through regular rewards and reflection through
the opportunity for comparing runs. We further discuss participants’
reactions to the sculptures in the results section. In the case of the figure and the lamp, we expected the desire to “complete” the sculpture
to encourage regular running activity. The figure consisted altogether
of eight body parts and the lamp had ten holes at the base which had
to be filled. In contrast, receiving a single piece of the necklace or the
jar can provide sufficient satisfaction.
3.3

NUMBER OF
WIDTH SEGMENTS
Average Speed

Figure

The figure (see figure 4 right) is composed of eight body parts, each
representing a run. The body parts can be plugged into the unfinished
figure. The height of a body part depends on the run’s duration, its
scope on the covered distance and the calories burned and average
speed affect its shape (number of width and height segments).

Jar

The jar (see figure 3 left) is composed of an undefined number of round
layers, each representing one run. The layers can be stacked on top of
each other, as the center-to-center diameter is fixed. The duration of a
run is visualized by the diameter of one layer, average speed and distance influence the shape of a layer. The number of width segments is
a factor of the speed and the number of height segments of the distance
covered.
3.2.2

lamp’s base. The difference in altitude associated with a run is represented by the two-dimensional progression of a pillar. A run with
no altitude differences results in a straight pillar, while a jagged pillar
represents large differences. To receive 3D printable models based on
large data variances, the elevation gain data is normalized. The average speed of a run can be perceived in a pillar’s thickness, the distance
affects the number of width segments and the duration is mapped to
the number of height segments.

Fabrication Process

Figure 5 offers an overview of the process we used to produce the
sculptures. The running data was tracked with a mobile tracking application and saved in the cloud (fig. 5-1). The data was then gathered
either through website export and mail (fig. 5-2a) or API calls (fig. 52b). Based on the captured data, we generated a digital version of the
sculptures as 3D STL files. We then used an Ultimaker Original6 to
3D print the sculptures (fig. 5-3). Each piece of the Activity Sculptures
was either handed out in person (fig. 5-4a) or by letter (fig. 5-4b).
3.3.1

Data

We extracted running data from four popular mobile running applications (Endomondo, Runkeeper, Nike+ Running and Runtastic). We
used as parameters to the sculptures: 1. the duration of a run, 2.
6 https://www.ultimaker.com/

DATA

CLOUD

a
b

STL
3

2

@
{API}

4

a
b

Fig. 5. The fabrication pipeline of the Activity Sculptures.

the distance covered, 3. the average speed 4. the amount of calories burned and 5. the elevation gain of a running session. These data
types were recorded by each of the running apps. We collected the
data of each run as TCX, GPX or CSV files. Depending on the participants’ preferences these were either sent directly by the participants,
or accessed from their user accounts via website export or API calls.
3.3.2

Digital 3D Models

Based on the extracted activity data, we produced the 3D models.
We first implemented the generation of the 3D objects, which were
then converted to obtain printable 3D objects. We used Three.js7 ,
a JavaScript library for WebGL - 3D in the browser - for developing the digital 3D models of the Activity Sculptures. In addition, we
used Csg.js8 another JavaScript library for WebGL for the construction. The Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) library uses boolean
operations (i.e. add, subtract, union and intersect) to build complex
objects by assembling simple objects. We used ThreeCSG.js9 as a
bridge between Three.js and Csg.js since the two libraries use different formats for geometry. In order to display the sculptures, we created
scenes for each sculpture, including the physical activity data and the
3D geometries. We used HTML templates which could be loaded in
a Web browser and exported the 3D models as STL (STereoLithography) files, a format suitable for 3D printing.
3.3.3

F IELD S TUDY

For a better understanding of the impact of physical visualizations of
running activity, we conducted a three-week field study. The main
objective of our study was to observe the influence of physical visualizations on participants’ behavior. We were especially interested in
the way visualizations would trigger reflection and discussions. We
also aimed at understanding participants’ general perception of physical visualizations of running data.
4.1

Table 1. Demographic details of the participants.
ID

Gender

Age

Occupation

Running routine

Running Team

1

male

25

student

once a week, 30-40 min

no

2

male

30

research
assistant

3 times a week, 10-20 km

yes

3

male

31

student

1-2 times a week, 5-10 km

no

4

female

29

research
assistant

twice a week, 5-10 km

yes

5

female

28

research
assistant

non-runner

no

6

male

27

controller

once a week, 5 km

no

7

female

24

student

non-runner

no

8

female

24

student

once in two weeks

no

9

female

24

student

non-runner

no

10

male

29

research
assistant

3 times a week, 10 km

yes

11

female

62

assessor

non-runner

no

12

female

30

designer

twice a week, 5 km

no

13

female

30

research
assistant

non-runner

yes

14

male

32

business
consultant

2-4 runs a week, 7-8 km

no

3D printing

We used Cura10 to transform the 3D models (STL files) into G-Code,
the machine code understood by the Ultimaker. Cura enabled us to
control printing options and increase the quality of printing results. To
keep the printing process as easy and fast as possible the only material
used was white polylactic acid (PLA).
4

represented a range of occupations including controller, designer, business consultant, assessor, students, and research assistants from our
university (see table 1).
Existing running habits: Our participants had various levels of running experience. Six participants had not gone running at all before the
study, whereas the remaining participants ran between one and three
times a week.
Existing use of tracking applications: Nine participants had already
used a tracking application (see also table 2). Four participants were
even part of a running team, meaning they worked together in the same
building and saw each other several times a day. They already shared
their running data in the same mobile tracking app (Endomondo). The
five students attended the same university and knew each other by
sight. Five participants had never used a mobile tracking app before
the study, either due to the inconvenience of carrying a smartphone
along or the perceived lack of additional value.

Participants

We recruited 14 participants11 to take part in the field study (8 females
and 6 males, aged between 24 and 62) by announcing the study in
a Facebook group of our university and using a newsletter with subscribers who are interested in study participation. The participants
7 http://threejs.org/
8 http://evanw.github.io/csg.js/
9 https://github.com/chandlerprall/ThreeCSG
10 https://github.com/daid/Cura
11 We recruited 16 individuals but one participant did not have time to go for a
run and another had technical issues, therefore the data of these two participants
was not taken into account.

4.2 Setup
To be part of the study, participants used one of the following tracking
applications: Endomondo, Runtastic, Nike+ Running or Runkeeper to
track their data. These were the most used tracking applications at
the moment of the study. The participants who did not use a tracking
app before were asked to choose one of these four applications. Furthermore participants chose the way in which their running data was
accessed. Options included sending the data per e-mail or providing
account data for the duration of the study.
4.3 Procedure
We conducted a three-week long field study in November 2013 in the
local area of Munich in Germany, with 14 participants. The study
leader conducted semi-structured personal interviews at the beginning
and at the end of the study. The interviews were complemented with
pen-and-paper questionnaires. Furthermore, we met with the participants throughout the study to hand-over the physical items. Participants received no compensation, but could keep their Activity Sculptures.
4.3.1 Preliminary Interviews
In the preliminary interviews participants signed a consent form and
were asked about their current physical activity routines and goals,
important types of running data and their experience with physical visualizations.

We then introduced the four physical visualizations by presenting
images of each visualization printed out on paper. First, we showed
only the visualizations without a legend, after that we presented variations with explanations about the data mapping. We decided not to
present any 3D printed visualizations, to better observe participants’
reactions when receiving their first piece. After this introduction we
asked the participants to share their first impressions of each visualization. Participants were also asked to rate aspects such as the potential of motivation or self-reflection on 5-point Likert scales. Finally,
each individual chose the type of Activity Sculptures they would get
throughout the study.
4.3.2 Field Study
During the three weeks of the study the participants went running,
and collected their running data with one of the tracking applications
mentioned above. The digital 3D sculpture pieces were generated according to the runs of the participants and then 3D printed. We tried to
keep the period between submitting the data and receiving the physical
visualization as short as possible (between one and three days). We observed reactions and statements of the participants when the handover
of the physical visualizations occurred in person and asked them to
express their first impressions of the sculpture.
4.3.3 Closing interviews
In the final interviews, we asked each participant to recall their experiences in the last weeks and gathered feedback on the physical visualizations. The interview focused on the visualizations, the social
aspects that came along with them and the participants’ running behavior. Additionally the interviewees had to rate the same aspects on
5-point Likert scales as in the preliminary interview as well as new
questions focusing on their impressions on the chosen sculpture.
4.3.4 Data Collected
We gathered data via semi-structured interviews, questionnaires as
well as running logs. The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed by two researches. We followed a qualitative coding approach
to identify both overall themes and more specific findings linked to
single participants.
5 R ESULTS
This section describes our key findings from the field study. We
start with an overview of participants and the results of the questionnaires, and continue our focus on the qualitative analysis of the semistructured interviews.
5.1 Participants Overview
Table 2 offers an overview of the study setup for every participant.
Five participants used Endomondo to track their data, four participants
chose Runtastic, three used Nike+ Running and two tracked their runs
with Runkeeper.
The most often mentioned reasons to go running were fitness (6),
relaxation (4), fun (2), balance (2) and group motivation (2). The most
important types of running data for the participants were speed (6),
distance (5), duration (4), progress (4) and route (2). Eight participants did not have any experience with physical visualizations, six
had already seen various examples.
The lamp was chosen by four participants, the jar by four as well,
the necklace by three, and the figure by three. Participants ran between
one and nine times over the three weeks of the study, for a total of
71 runs across participants. Twelve participants preferred a personal
delivery of the sculpture pieces, the remaining two chose a delivery by
letter.
5.2 Questionnaires
During the preliminary and closing interviews, participants filled 5point Likert scale questionnaires (ranging from 1: very good; to 5:
very poor). Participants appreciated the general idea of visualizing
running data through physical visualizations (median=1, in preliminary and closing interview respectively). Before the study only four

Table 2. Overview of the study setup for every participant.
ID

Tracking App (*no
app use before study)

Visualization

Delivery

# runs / received
pieces

1

RunKeeper*

lamp

personal

6

2

Endomondo

figure

personal

9

3

RunKeeper

jar

personal

6

4

Endomondo

jar

personal

8

5

Endomondo*

necklace

personal

3

6

Nike+ Running

lamp

per letter

4

7

Runtastic*

lamp

personal

5

8

Nike+ Running

figure

personal

5

9

Runtastic

necklace

personal

4

10

Endomondo

jar

personal

6

11

Runtastic*

figure

personal

7

12

Nike+ Running

jar

per letter

4

13

Endomondo

necklace

personal

1

14

Runtastic*

lamp

personal

3

participants were impartial, whereas all other participants rated the
idea as good (2 participants) or very good (8 participants). In the closing interviews all participants rated the idea as either good (6 participants) or very good (8 participants). The motivational potential was
also rated as good (median=2, in preliminary and closing interview
respectively).
After the study, participants rated the suitability of the sculptures for
comparison with others and for self-expression (before median=2, after median=4) less positively than before. However, it should be noted
that only participants who were impartial before the study decreased
their ratings. While participants that were convinced of the potential
for comparison with others and self-expression before the study did
not change their opinion. The necklace stood out, as the only sculpture
whose ratings increased in these two questions. Finally, the ratings for
self-reflection increased for all sculptures after the study (before median=2, after median=1).
The questionnaire used in the closing interview included further
questions regarding the participants impressions on their chosen sculptures. The scale ranged from 1 (very good) to 5 (very poor). Participants rated the aesthetics, practical benefit, information content and
the quality of the sculptures overall as good (for all questions median=2). It is worth mentioning that the necklace sculpture received
the best ratings overall, apart from practical benefit, in which the lamp
and the jar scored better.
5.3

Interviews

We interviewed participants throughout the study. In our preliminary
interviews we focused on the first impressions of each sculpture type,
e.g. what participants appreciated and disliked about the visualizations, and their motivation in picking a specific type. Throughout the
study, the study leader also collected feedback from the twelve participants who received their sculpture pieces personally. Finally the concluding interviews included open-ended questions about the physical
visualizations and their influence on participants’ behavior. Below, the
results from the interviews are presented.
5.3.1

Initial Choice of Activity Sculpture

Participants picked the type of visualization they preferred. They balanced considerations about aesthetics, practicality and design, envisioning how the sculptures would scale, look and stand after multiple
runs.
Aesthetics The aesthetical aspects played an important role in the
choice of sculpture. One participant (P5) liked the necklace sculpture
because it was enjoyable jewelry she could wear. Two participants also

mentioned that the necklace would be an attractive piece of jewelry
with only one bead on it as well as many.
Aesthetics were strongly linked to the concerns participants expressed regarding the ability of certain sculptures to scale and their
appearance after several runs. Most participants expected the jar and
the necklace to scale well, independent of the number of runs completed. Four participants did not like the robot-like shape of the figure
sculpture and worried that it would look unaesthetic or unproportional
when assembled. One participant (P11) had difficulties imagining the
single pieces of the jar fitting together if large differences between the
runs occurred.
Abstract representation Six participants explicitly liked the abstract manner in which the running data was visualized. The figure
sculpture represented the least abstract visualization to them and as
such they preferred the other visualization options.
Interpreting the data The ability to “read” or interpret the sculpture was also an important factor to some of the participants. Two
participants appreciated the visibility of progress enabled by the lamp
sculpture. One participant (P6) liked the lamp “because it is clear
when pieces are missing”. Similar to the lamp, two participants valued the same property in the figure sculpture. Overall, the additional
variables such as the elevation gain used in the lamp, had little influence on the initial choice.
Practical purpose The practicality or usefulness of the sculpture
was favored by some participants. They appreciated the jar for its visibility and storage ability. The practical purpose of the lamp was also
noted positively. On the other hand the perceived lack of usefulness
and later use of the figure sculpture led five participants to pick other
sculptures.
Playfulness Two participants who chose the figure sculpture
stated that “it is funny and exciting to imagine what will come out
in the end, and what it would look like”. All participants who chose
the figure highlighted it as the most interesting option.
5.3.2 Perception of the Activity Sculpture
Our preliminary interviews and surveys indicated that participants
were not interested in getting a data oriented representation of their
activity, which led us to propose more abstract Activity Sculptures.
Interpreting the Data The abstract nature of the sculpture meant
that participants had at times difficulties understanding the way in
which their run was mapped to the shape they received. However,
these difficulties diminished as participants received more sculpture
parts with different shapes. For instance, participant 14 noted that the
first piece was not expressive but once in association with the second
piece, the difference between the two runs was noticeable. In contrast,
participant 4 who had almost identical runs, had difficulties in perceiving any differences between the sculpture parts. Participants who
chose the necklace stated that they appreciated the distinct visibility
of increased running performance and the fact that it was kept rather
simple.
Expectations and Aesthetics After participants registered for
the study and took part in the initial interviews, expectations started to
form as well as anticipation for the objects they would receive. Many
participants were concerned about the appearance of the pieces once
put together (i.e. the jar). In addition there was concern about the
reliability of the data (particularly the elevation gain). However scalability concerns were not expressed in later interviews and participants
seemed to appreciate how the pieces fitted together.
As they received their first pieces, the reactions of participants fell
into two broad categories, i.e. positive surprise about the aesthetics,
and disappointment related to a discrepancy between their expectations and the pieces they received.
The necklace beads were appreciated by participants who had selected them. Participant 6 found her first bead smaller than she had
expected however she regarded it as “pretty” and wore the necklace
around her neck immediately. Participant 12, who had chosen the jar
found his pieces beautiful and enjoyed their usefulness even when the

jar consisted of merely two pieces, as he immediately used it to hold a
pencil.
Positively surprised by the sculpture, participant 10 noted that he
did not expect the pieces to look as nice as they did, but much more
clunky. He also remarked that for others the figure may not appear as
nice, which was secondary to him, as he would know what effort he put
into receiving the sculpture. According to this participant, watching
the sculpture grow created an emotional attachment, which increased
the significance of the sculpture to him personally.
Overall, all participants but two were happy with their choice and
would have chosen the same sculpture again. Participant 8 would have
chosen the necklace over the figure since she found that the necklace
scaled better. Participant 10 would have selected the lamp instead of
the jar because this sculpture type also visualizes differences in altitude.
Surprises arose as participants received their piece and started to
compare them to their other pieces or the pieces of others. Participant
2 expressed minor disappointment about his first piece as he saw other
participants receiving their first jar pieces which were much larger than
the small foot of his figure, although he had run for a long time.
Another participant (P5) was disappointed when she received a
piece after a short route, which she had run at a relatively high speed
by her standards. She found that the sculpture piece only expressed
the short distance she ran compared to her other runs, but that it did
not represent the speed of this run.
Personalization The tangibility of the pieces enabled participants
to personalize the sculptures to their liking. Given the minimalist form
of the sculptures, participants were able to appropriate them through
various means.
One participant (P1) had the idea to write the number of the runs at
the bottom of each piece of the lamp figure to allow him to track the
order. Another one (P6) spelled out a strategy on how to arrange the
beads of her necklace by putting the biggest piece in the middle and the
others around it. She also had thought about painting the single pieces
in different shades of blue according to the date of the run so that she
can always track the order despite rearranging them on the necklace.
Participant 2 thought of personalizing his figure sculpture by dressing
it in a shirt with a name or a number and finally he attached a small
medal to his figure.
The sculptures were actually embedded in everyday life by several
participants (see also figure 1). For instance, jars were used as a storage box for a USB stick, adhesive tape and pencils while another participant used it as a tea candle holder. The necklace was worn by all
participants and the lamp and figure sculpture were placed at various
locations such as an office desk or a nightstand.
Perception by Other People The visibility and uniqueness of
the Activity Sculptures meant that they often caught the attention of
people surrounding the participants. Participant 6 mentioned that she
normally did not like to share her running data, e.g. by posting a run
on Facebook, however she liked to show her necklace as she preferred
it as a way of self-expression. According to the participant, this coincides with the rather subtle data representation and the fact that she
could see peoples’ reactions immediately.
The abstract nature of our objects also meant that participants could
choose to explain its significance whenever they liked. Participant 1
stated that one of his visitors liked the idea of having a physical object
which cannot be identified as being related to physical activity. Participant 11 enjoyed the necklace because it could be worn openly around
the neck and is thus easily noticed by others. She further experienced
the necklace as a nice conversation starter.
5.3.3 Impact on the Running Activity
The interviews revealed some anecdotal evidence of the Activity
Sculptures’ motivational potential and influence on running routines.
Motivation The “always on” aspect of the Activity Sculptures was
an important motivational factor, as they were visible at any time the
participants were in their vicinity. The most extreme case being the
necklace which is worn at all times. Participant 13 who was part of

the running team referred to her only piece as the “pearl of shame”,
since it indicated that she only ran once.
Comparison of pieces also increased the motivation of some participants, either by comparing them to a previous run, or comparing
them to others’ runs. For instance, participant 11 accidentally saw a
larger piece than her own which motivated her to achieve larger pieces
as well. Participant 4 however was disappointed when receiving his
second piece, as it was clearly thinner than the first piece. This raised
his motivation to a longer subsequent run in order to receive a wider
ring for his jar.
Assembling complete figures, i.e. receiving all pieces also proved to
be a motivational factor, especially for the sculptures with a defined
number of pieces (figure and lamp). Three participants mentioned that
the lamp influenced their running behavior such that it provided an
incentive to fill all the hollows.

participants pointed out the ability of the sculptures to encourage discussion. They often served as a conversation starter. The participants
who where part of the running group mentioned that they often talked
about not only the sculptures but the entire study during lunch.

Changing Running Habits An interesting impact the Activity
Sculptures had was on the change of participants’ running habits. Curiosity, playfulness and aesthetics began influencing the way participants ran as they tried to control the shape of the pieces they would
receive. One participant (P9) even mentioned having a piece in mind
during every run.
One necklace user (P5), who had mentioned in the preliminary interviews that she normally did not run when it rains, actually ran in the
rain, due to her excitement about receiving her first sculpture piece.
The participants receiving the lamp, felt motivated to experiment
with speed and altitude. One participant (P6) for example intentionally
ran uphill and another (P7) ran the same route twice in a different
manner, in order to see how this would be reflected in the sculpture.
Participant 5 was also surprised at how small and angular her first
piece was. This motivated her to modify her running accordingly in
order to achieve a nicer and rounder bead. In contrast, participant 11
tried to achieve an unproportional figure sculpture to test the limits of
the system.

6.1

5.3.4 The Reward Experience
The participants also raised questions related to their expectation and
the actual reception of the pieces as rewards.
Time of Delivery The timing of the reward was also a source of
discussion. As mentioned in the design discussion, we initially envisioned a slower reward mechanism. Participants seemed to consider
that having a delay between the run and the reward was beneficial.
Participant 9 felt that receiving a piece the day after the run was the
best choice, because receiving it directly after running did not leave
any chance to speculate on the run and what the piece would look like.
Along the same lines, participant 14 preferred receiving the pieces
with a delay, arguing that directly after a run one already felt the reward of having finished it, whereas receiving the piece a few days later
could act as an additional reward for the run.
Excitement Participants described the ways in which they anticipated the pieces they would get and surprise appeared to be an
important part of the rewarding experience. For example, participant 11 wanted to go running immediately after she received her first
piece since she wondered what she would receive next. Participant 8
skipped her yoga classes several times during the study weeks since
she knew that she would not get a visualization for this kind of activity. She mentioned that it would have been nice to get rewarded with
sculpture parts for this activity too.
Participants who picked the figure sculpture were always looking
forward to receiving the next part of their figure. The mystery of which
body part would be presented to them next was especially appreciated.
Participant 10 even noted that she would have found it more interesting if she had not known in advance what her sculpture would look
like until she had put the pieces together.
Conversation Finally, the rewards provoked exchanges and discussions. Participant 5 mentioned that when she received a new piece
she wanted to go to her colleague to show it to him and find out if
he also received a new piece. Apparently, her colleague had the same
idea and so both met in the corridor holding their new pieces. All

6

D ISCUSSION

The design and study of the Activity Sculptures raised questions regarding the interpretation of the data, its mapping, the role of comparison and experimentation in supporting reflection, sense-making and
engagement with the data. It also raised technical questions related
to scalability and sustainability. We believe that the physical nature
of such visualizations stresses design questions which are relevant for
casual information visualization, and maybe even information visualization in general.
Sculptures as Personal Visualizations

Materializing personal data encouraged the interpretation and reflection on participants’ activity. Participants improved their reading of
the visualizations over the course of the study. Through experimentation, they developed a finer understanding of how their runs influenced
the sculptures. For instance, the mapping of the elevation gain and the
impact of different runs on the sculpture parts were explored in a creative and playful way by the participants.
The fact that the visualizations required personal knowledge to be
interpreted seemed to have fostered reflection on the pieces and the
corresponding runs. It led participants to engage with the objects, by
observing them, testing their limits or comparing them. It also meant
that participants could display them freely without feeling as if they
were over-exposing themselves: it neither felt as bragging about ones
performance, nor did it felt as displaying something one would have
preferred to keep to oneself. This could be argued in any type of casual
visualizations which can be shared with others (via social networks or
other means).
6.2

Challenges of Static Representations

One of the main benefits of digital media is its dynamic properties:
most infovis work supports updates in visualizations as new data
comes in, and lets users manipulate the view to match their interest.
Physical visualizations are different in that they are extremely static
and hard to update once they have been produced. This is the reason
for our choice of an extensible model which enabled us to augment the
sculpture as new data was being produced. However the variables and
the mappings were set from the beginning and did not change.
It could be interesting to give participants more freedom of choice,
e.g. letting them choose and change the variables and mappings or
specify concrete goals. It is even conceivable to let the user create their
own sculptures, for example with the help of an online customizer.
6.3

Scalability

Running data often underlies strong variances, which makes scalability challenging, especially because Activity Sculptures evolve over a
long period of time (as they aim at fostering regular physical activity). Finding a data mapping that accommodates people’s different
running patterns can be difficult. It needs to display both minor and
large changes in the data, while supporting comparison and, not the
least, resulting in an object that is suitable for 3D printing. Scalability
can be considered along various dimensions.
1. Across people: The sculpture need to accommodate both a runner training for a marathon and someone running short distances at
high speeds. The sculpture should still be readable in both cases (one
should be able to notice the variations), and support comparability.
2. Over time: The sculpture should still stand on its own and be
meaningful after a high number of runs. The necklace and the jar are
theoretically scalable but would become less attractive or less functional at a certain point. The lamp and the figure are not scalable because of their fixed amount of possible parts. A solution could be
choosing one type of sculpture for a specified goal and once this is
accomplished another can be chosen. This could be combined nicely

with well-known gamification principles, e.g. unlocking new sculpture types after attaining specific achievements.
6.4

Reflection and Self-Expression

By making the runs visible and tangible, Activity Sculptures appeared
to foster reflection but self-expression only in specific conditions.
Activity Sculptures are a promising medium for fostering reflection on activity. Schön describes that reflective practices are composed of reflection-in-action and reflection-on-action [31]. Reflectionin-action is related to thinking ahead of the action, critically experiencing and adjusting to the activity as it unfolds. We observed this
precise phenomenon as participants anticipated the sculptures before
the runs, thought about them while running, and sometimes adjusted
their running in order to get a specific shape. Reflection-on-action is
much more related to the appraisal of the action after it has occurred,
which was observed as participants compared their pieces and conversed these with others. Furthermore, Activity Sculptures allow are
more abstract and enjoyable reflection on ones’ physical activities than
through detailed activity data composed of precise numbers and histories. In a sense, Activity Sculptures are complementary to the digital
visualizations which are accessible through most mobile tracking applications.
The ratings for the jar for the comparison with others decreased
markedly. This may be due to the fact that only two participants had
contact to each other but were not interested in comparison, since they
knew that they were running on different performance levels. Similarly none of the participants who chose the figure were bothered by
the circumstance that it was hard to compare these sculptures with each
other. Taking these findings into account we think that it is of minor
importance that the comparison of the sculptures in a competitive way
is supported.
The necklace was the only sculpture type which fulfilled participants’ expectations regarding self-expression and the comparison with
others. It is the only sculpture type which can be worn on the body and
therefore easily be seen and shown to others. In our opinion it seems
to be the most promising design direction for Activity Sculptures to be
geared to accessory design and wearable visualizations.
6.5

Sustainability

Producing plastic objects for playful or motivational purposes raises
issues of sustainability. We argue that this only emphasizes the issue
of sustainability, more so than usual infovis projects. Indeed, mobile
activity tracking, remote data storage and processing also consume
great deals of energy as well as require the production of technological artefacts. Nonetheless we acknowledge, that Activity Sculptures
increase the amount of products in the environment. To overcome this
concern we might consider only offering summary sculptures that represent the data of an entire month. In addition or in complement, old
sculptures could be recycled. Projects such as the Filabot Reclaimer12
for example allow the recycling and reuse of 3D prints created with
PLA. Another possibility is the usage of biodegradable PLA filament.
6.6

compare against more traditional physical visualizations such as bar
charts or digital visualizations in a follow up study.

Impact on Motivation

We conducted this exploratory field study with 14 participants over
the duration of three weeks. Longer studies with more participants
are needed before drawing conclusions on the motivational potential
of Activity Sculptures.
The manual handover process enabled us to gather feedback from
participants and better our understanding of their relationship to the
sculptures. However, this manual handover might have influenced the
participants’ experience, especially at initial handover. As the participants were in regular contact with the study leader multiple times they
might have felt an obligation to comply and be a ’good subject’ [4],
e.g. to run several times during the study.
Finally, we limited our study to four types of Activity Sculptures,
a very small sample of the design space. It would be interesting to
12 http://www.filabot.com/

7

C ONCLUSION

AND

F UTURE W ORK

We presented the design and creation process of Activity Sculptures, a
series of material representations of tracked running data. The system
was evaluated in a three-week field study with 14 participants. The
study revealed a great acceptance for the Activity Sculptures. Especially their ability to improve motivation and self-reflection convinced
the participants. We further uncovered their potential for a more creative view at ones’ activity (playfulness), as participants started to
change their running routines in order to impact the form and aesthetics of the final sculpture pieces. The physical and “always on”
nature further reinforced social interactions among participants. We
found that personalization was important for our Activity Sculptures.
The abstract and minimalist form of the sculptures was well received
and encouraged participants to style and utilize them according to their
own ideas. Furthermore individual preferences should be considered
regarding the data mapping of the sculptures. These findings could be
transferred to digital visualizations as well, e.g. by giving the opportunity to personalize the visualizations in a mobile tracking application.
The results collected through the online questionnaire revealed that
participants preferred receiving the sculptures only for the achievement of pre-established goals or once per month. While our field study
could not take these preferences into account due to the limited study
time, this could be a valuable strategy for a longer term study. In order to investigate whether the sculptures actually have a motivational
effect in the long term, (which is clearly the objective,) and to preclude the novelty effect as a predominant explanation of this success,
further longitudinal studies with a larger sample are needed. Material
costs and the time-consuming printing process play an important role
for the practicality of physical visualizations of running data. Before
realizing this concept for a long-term study or beyond a study, these
aspects in particular need to be taken into account.
In this paper, only a small part of the design space of such Activity
Sculptures was covered. One aspect to be investigated in future studies
is the utilization of other materials. Plastic seemed an inferior material for visualizing running data, as running is associated with nature.
Therefore, natural materials such as wood and other fabrication tools
such as laser cutters could be used. Furthermore the concept of one
sculpture for each person could be changed to one sculpture on which
numerous people collaborate. Each person would then contribute to
the common sculpture. This approach could be particularly interesting
for members of a running team, a group of physically active colleagues
or people who share an apartment and want to engage in more regular
physical activity.
Another area of future investigation is the mapping of meaningful
training patterns to beautiful sculpture shapes. The aesthetical mappings of longer distances and higher speeds to rounder shapes were
purely experimental. For a purposeful product, these mappings would
have to be determined together with experienced trainers, such that the
different types of training (e.g. endurance, speed or interval) would
each lead to meaning- and beautiful sculptures.
To broaden the scope of Activity Sculptures by reaching a larger
audience, public events such as marathons could reward runners with
such artifacts tailored to their performance instead of medals. An extension to other physical activities is conceivable as well. Examples
are cycling, hiking or daily routines. Even the progress of completion of to-do lists could be physically visualized and thereby promote
efficient and timely completion in a playful and unobtrusive way.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Tessa-Virginia Hannemann for proof-reading and
helpful comments, our colleagues for fruitful discussions, our participants for running and our reviewers for their constructive feedback.

R EFERENCES
[1] D. Agnelli, D. Buzzini, and T. Drori. Fashion victims. In Proceedings
of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques, pages 312–312. ACM, 2004.
[2] L. Bacon, N. Keim, M. Van Loan, M. Derricote, B. Gale, A. Kazaks, and
J. Stern. Evaluating a” non-diet’wellness intervention for improvement
of metabolic fitness, psychological well-being and eating and activity behaviors. International Journal of Obesity, 2002.
[3] C. G. Bell and J. Gemmell. Total Recall: How the E-Memory Revolution
Will Change Everything. Dutton Adult, 2009.
[4] B. Brown, S. Reeves, and S. Sherwood. Into the wild: Challenges and
opportunities for field trial methods. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, pages 1657–
1666. ACM, 2011.
[5] H. Brynjarsdottir, M. Håkansson, J. Pierce, E. Baumer, C. DiSalvo, and
P. Sengers. Sustainably unpersuaded: how persuasion narrows our vision
of sustainability. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’12, pages 947–956. ACM, 2012.
[6] S. Consolvo, K. Everitt, I. Smith, and J. A. Landay. Design requirements
for technologies that encourage physical activity. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems, CHI ’06,
pages 457–466. ACM, 2006.
[7] S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, and J. A. Landay. Theory-driven design
strategies for technologies that support behavior change in everyday life.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’09, pages 405–414. ACM, 2009.
[8] S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, T. Toscos, M. Y. Chen, J. Froehlich,
B. Harrison, P. Klasnja, A. LaMarca, L. LeGrand, R. Libby, et al. Activity sensing in the wild: a field trial of ubifit garden. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’08, pages 1797–1806. ACM, 2008.
[9] P. Dourish. Hci and environmental sustainability: The politics of design
and the design of politics. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems, DIS ’10, pages 1–10. ACM, 2010.
[10] C. Fan, J. Forlizzi, and A. K. Dey. A spark of activity: exploring informative art as visualization for physical activity. In Proceedings of the 2012
ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, pages 81–84. ACM, 2012.
[11] E. Freeman and D. Gelernter. Lifestreams: A storage model for personal
data. ACM SIGMOD Bulletin, 25:80–86, 1996.
[12] J. Froehlich, L. Findlater, and J. Landay. The design of eco-feedback
technology. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 1999–2008. ACM, 2010.
[13] J. Gemmell, R. Lueder, and G. Bell. The mylifebits lifetime store. In
Proceedings of the 2003 ACM SIGMM Workshop on Experiential Telepresence, ETP ’03, pages 80–83. ACM, 2003.
[14] D. Grimley, J. O. Prochaska, W. F. Velicer, L. M. Blais, and C. C. DiClemente. The transtheoretical model of change. Changing the self:
Philosophies, techniques, and experiences, pages 201–227, 1994.
[15] D. Hyerle. Visual tools for transforming information into knowledge.
Corwin Press, 2008.
[16] N. Jafarinaimi, J. Forlizzi, A. Hurst, and J. Zimmerman. Breakaway:
An ambient display designed to change human behavior. In CHI ’05
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA
’05, pages 1945–1948. ACM, 2005.
[17] Y. Jansen and P. Dragicevic. An interaction model for visualizations beyond the desktop. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 19(12):2396–2405, 2013.
[18] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, and J.-D. Fekete. Evaluating the efficiency of
physical visualizations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13, pages 2593–2602. ACM,
2013.
[19] R. A. Khot, L. Hjorth, and F. F. Mueller. Understanding physical activity through 3d printed material artifacts. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’14. ACM,
2014.
[20] R. A. Khot and F. F. Mueller. Sweat-atoms: Turning physical exercise
into physical objects. In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’13, pages 3075–3078. ACM, 2013.
[21] I. Li, A. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. A stage-based model of personal informatics
systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 557–566. ACM, 2010.
[22] I. Li, A. K. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. Understanding my data, myself: Sup-

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]
[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]
[39]

[40]

[41]

porting self-reflection with ubicomp technologies. In Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’11,
pages 405–414. ACM, 2011.
J. J. Lin, L. Mamykina, S. Lindtner, G. Delajoux, and H. B. Strub.
Fish’n’steps: Encouraging physical activity with an interactive computer game. In UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing, pages 261–278.
Springer, 2006.
E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham. Building a practically useful theory of goal
setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American psychologist,
57(9):705, 2002.
N. McLean, S. Griffin, K. Toney, and W. Hardeman. Family involvement
in weight control, weight maintenance and weight-loss interventions: a
systematic review of randomised trials. International journal of obesity,
27(9):987–1005, 2003.
S. A. Munson and S. Consolvo. Exploring goal-setting, rewards, selfmonitoring, and sharing to motivate physical activity. In Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2012 6th International Conference on, pages 25–32. IEEE, 2012.
Z. Pousman, J. T. Stasko, and M. Mateas. Casual information visualization: Depictions of data in everyday life. IEEE Trans. Visualization and
Computer Graphics (TVCG) (Proc. InfoVis, 7:2007, 2007.
S. Purpura, V. Schwanda, K. Williams, W. Stubler, and P. Sengers.
Fit4life: the design of a persuasive technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 423–432. ACM, 2011.
Y. Rogers, W. R. Hazlewood, P. Marshall, N. Dalton, and S. Hertrich.
Ambient influence: Can twinkly lights lure and abstract representations
trigger behavioral change? In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, Ubicomp ’10, pages 261–
270. ACM, 2010.
Y. Rogers and G. Marsden. Does he take sugar?: Moving beyond the
rhetoric of compassion. interactions, 20(4):48–57, July 2013.
D. A. Schön. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in
Action. Basic Books, June 1983.
T. Skog, S. Ljungblad, and L. E. Holmquist. Between aesthetics and utility: designing ambient information visualizations. In IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, INFOVIS 2003., pages 233–240. IEEE, 2003.
S. Stusak, A. Tabard, and A. Butz. Can physical visualizations support
analytical tasks? Vis’ 2013 (poster), November 2013.
S. Swaminathan, C. Shi, Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, L. Oehlberg, and J.-D.
Fekete. Supporting the design and fabrication of physical visualizations.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’14. ACM, 2014.
A. Vande Moere. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel: Exploring the physicality of information visualization. In Information Visualisation, 2008.
IV’08. 12th International Conference, pages 469–474. IEEE, 2008.
A. Vande Moere and S. Patel. Analyzing the design approaches of physical data sculptures in a design education context. Visual Information
Communications International (VINCI’09), 2009.
F. B. Viégas and M. Wattenberg. Artistic data visualization: Beyond
visual analytics. In Online Communities and Social Computing, pages
182–191. Springer, 2007.
G. Wolf. Know thyself: Tracking every facet of life, from sleep to mood
to pain 24/7/365. Wired, 17(07):92–95, 2009.
R. Xiong and J. Donath. Peoplegarden: creating data portraits for users.
In Proceedings of the 12th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology, pages 37–44. ACM, 1999.
F. Yetim. Critical perspective on persuasive technology reconsidered. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’13, pages 3327–3330. ACM, 2013.
J. Zhao and A. Vande Moere. Embodiment in data sculpture: a model
of the physical visualization of information. In Proceedings of the 3rd
international conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment
and Arts, pages 343–350. ACM, 2008.

