Poster Session

SUI’14, October 4-5, 2014, Honolulu, HI, USA

Projection Augmented Physical Visualizations
Simon Stusak
University of Munich (LMU)
simon.stusak@ifi.lmu.de

Markus Teufel
University of Munich (LMU)
teufel@cip.ifi.lmu.de

ABSTRACT

PROTOYPE

Physical visualizations are an emergent area of research and
appear in increasingly diverse forms. While they provide
an engaging way of data exploration, they are often limited
by a fixed representation and lack interactivity. In this work
we discuss our early approaches and experiences in combining physical visualizations with spatial augmented reality and
present an initial prototype.

For our initial prototype (see figure 1) an area chart as type
of visualization was chosen because it offers much space for
augmentation. It was built out of birch wood, as this type
of wood is easily processed with a laser cutter and its bright
tint is well-suited for projection augmentation. Based on
web technologies 3D models for the projection and 2D vector shapes for the laser cutter were generated. The calibration process was done using mapamok1 . The PV visualizes
the export of small arms and light weapons of different countries. The projection was used to display labels and legends,
to show additional data in form of stacked area charts and to
provide vertical and horizontal guides to simplify comparison
of different data items. Interaction, e.g. moving the guides or
changing the data for the stacked area chart was done with a
remote tablet device.

Author Keywords

physical visualizations; information visualization; projection
augmentation; spatial augmented reality
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m INFORMATION INTERFACES AND PRESENTATION (e.g., HCI): Miscellaneous
INTRODUCTION

Physical Visualizations (PV) are visualizations in which data
is mapped to physical form instead of pixels [1]. Vande Moere [3] writes that PVs have the potential of sparking curiosity and turning data exploration into a fascinating experience.
Spatial Augmented Reality is used to extend arbitrary physical objects with a digital layer. Shader Lamps by Raskar
et al. [2] is a popular example in which a projector is used
to augment real world objects with a texture. As most PVs
are limited by fixed visual appearance, a digital augmentation
seems a promising approach to minimize this constraint and
provide an additional layer for interaction.

Figure 1. Projection Augmented Area Chart

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Our exploration reveals that projection augmentation can enhance PVs. Guides for example help to overcome problems
arising from perspective distortion. The augmentation of the
PVs surface with additional information can compensate its
static nature without losing the advantages of physical objects, which can be touched and explored with all senses [3].
As our early prototype only supports interaction using a remote tablet device the next step is to implement direct touch
interaction on the PV itself. Another promising approach
would be to integrate the position of the user and adapt the
projection depending on their movements.

CONCEPT PHASE

The design of projection augmented physical visualizations
can be split into several dimensions. The physical visualization itself is the characteristic element and its material (e.g.
plastic, wood), fabrication (e.g. 3D printer, laser cutter), size
and space for the projection should be taken into account.
The projection can differ on the basis of its position (e.g.
direct projection on the PV, projection near the PV) and its
purpose (e.g. showing additional information, enabling interaction with the data). Furthermore the input modality should
be considered (e.g. touching the PV, disassembling and reassembling the PV, remote input device).

REFERENCES

1. Jansen, Y., Dragicevic, P., and Fekete, J.-D. Evaluating
the efficiency of physical visualizations. In Proceedings
of CHI ’13, ACM (2013), 2593–2602.
2. Raskar, R., Welch, G., Low, K.-L., and Bandyopadhyay,
D. Shader lamps: Animating real objects with
image-based illumination. In Proceedings of the 12th
Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques.,
Springer (2001).
3. Vande Moere, A. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel:
Exploring the physicality of information visualization. In
Information Visualisation, 2008. IV’08, IEEE (2008),
469–474.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SUI’14, October 4–5, 2014, Honolulu, HI, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-2820-3/14/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2659766.2661210

1

145

https://github.com/YCAMInterlab/mapamok

