TastyBeats:
Designing Palatable Representations of Physical Activity
Rohit Ashok Khot1, Jeewon Lee1, Deepti Aggarwal2, Larissa Hjorth3, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller1
1
2
3
Exertion Games Lab
Microsoft Centre for Social NUI,
RMIT University,
RMIT University, Australia
University of Melbourne, Australia
Australia
{ rohit, jeewon, floyd }@
daggarwal@student.unimelb.edu.au larissa.hjorth@rmit.edu.au
exertiongameslab.org

Figure 1: TastyBeats is a fountain-based interactive system that creates a fluidic spectacle of
mixing sport drinks based on heart rate data of physical activity.
ABSTRACT

In this paper, we introduce palatable representations that
besides improving the understanding of physical activity
through abstract visualization also provide an appetizing
drink to celebrate the experience of being physically active.
By designing such palatable representations, our aim is to
offer novel opportunities for reflection on one’s physical
activities. We present TastyBeats, a fountain-based
interactive system that creates a fluidic spectacle of mixing
sport drinks based on heart rate data of physical activity,
which the user can later consume to replenish the loss of
body fluids due to the physical activity. We articulate our
experiences in designing the system as well as learning
gained through field deployments of the system in
participants’ homes for a period of two weeks. We found
that our system increased participants’ awareness of
physical activity and facilitated a shared social experience,
while the prepared drink was treated as a hedonic reward
that motivated participants to exercise more. Ultimately,
with this work, we aim to inspire and guide design thinking
on palatable representations, which we believe opens up
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2015, April 18 - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702197

new interaction possibilities to support physical activity
experience.
Author Keywords

Palatable representation; fluidic interfaces; physical
activity; quantified self; personal informatics; Human-Food
Interaction (HFI).
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

Activity trackers like pedometers and heart rate monitors
are becoming increasingly popular to support physical
activity experiences [41]. These devices collect personally
relevant data such as bodily responses to physical activity
and provide opportunities to reflect on the collected data
through self-monitoring [22]. For example, pedometers
count the number of steps taken in a day, while heart rate
monitors inform about exercise intensity. Research suggests
that regular use of these devices can increase user
motivation for physical activity [35, 43].
One key aspect of tracking physical activity is visualization,
which improves understanding of the data [22, 35].
“Seeing” makes knowledge credible [4] and “greater
visibility of information puts an added responsibility to act
on” as pointed out by Viseu and Suchman [45]. For
example, by visualizing physical activity data, users can
gain a better understanding of their physical activity levels
and can make this gained knowledge actionable towards

their health and fitness related aims [22]. However, physical
activity data such as heart rate is abstract in nature and does
not have a “natural counterpart that can be graphically
reproduced”, as noted by Vande Moere [44]; thus
highlighting the role of designers for creating meaningful
mappings to communicate this information to the user. In
response, previous works in the field of HCI have looked at
different on-screen visualization methods [1, 7, 8, 12, 23].
A screen, on one hand, offers the capacity to stimulate
visual senses, but on other hand, often reduces the user
interaction to just the reading of information due to its flat
display surface. We think that there is an opportunity to
explore new ways of engaging with physical activity data
that should go beyond visualizing data on screens. We
believe that physical activity data is not just a number, but
rather a unique and personal outcome that reflects the
amount of energy expended and efforts invested by the
user; which we think needs to be emphasized and
celebrated.
We, therefore, introduce palatable representations that
besides improving the understanding of physical activity
through fluidic visualization also provide an appetizing
drink to celebrate the experience of being physically active.
Palatable representation for us involves the use of drinkable
fluids such as sports drinks to represent physical activity
data. As a proof of concept, we present TastyBeats, an
interactive system that utilizes heart rate data of physical
activity to create a personalized sports drink. TastyBeats
employs a fountain-based interaction to fashion a fluidic
spectacle that can also be tasted, thus offering vivid ways of
engagement with the data. Additionally, the prepared drink
serves as a refreshment to replenish body fluids that were
lost during physical activity. As such, palatable
representations contribute to the human energy cycle, where
the energy, which is lost during the physical activity, is
given back to the body in the form of a drink.
In order to understand how palatable representations can
support the everyday physical activity experience, we
conducted “in the wild” [34] field deployments of the
TastyBeats system. We deployed TastyBeats in three
households for a period of two weeks where six
participants, two from each house, interacted with the
system on a daily basis. Participants were asked to measure
their heart rate data for the entire day and then prepare a
drink in the evening. We found that our system increased
awareness about physical activity and the experience was
rewarding and motivating for the participants. We utilize
these findings as well as our experiences of designing the
system to articulate interesting aspects of palatable
representations, which we believe opens up new interaction
possibilities to support the human energy-cycle.
RELATED WORK

Commercial physical activity sensor systems often support
visualizations of physical activity data through an
accompanying website or a smartphone app, where physical

activity data is analyzed through numbers, bar charts and
graphs. Studies, however, show that many people have low
graph literacy skills and, therefore, do not easily grasp
statistical data [15]. As a result, much of the health and
physical activity related smartphone apps could fall short in
engaging people. In response, prior works have looked at
other ways of representing physical activity data.
Visualization through digital metaphors

Consolvo et al. [7] redesigned mobile phone screens in the
form of a virtual garden where the flowers grow in size as
the user performs physical activity; This method of
visualization motivated participants in maintaining their
physical activity as participants wanted to make the virtual
flowers grow. In another system called Fish’n’Steps [23],
user’s step count was mapped to an animated fish, which
became happy or sad based upon how many steps the user
had taken in a day. However, authors found that
participants were not interested to look at the fish when
they were inactive because they knew that their sedentary
activity would make the fish sad [23]. In other works,
Anderson et al. [1] developed a system called Shakra where
physical activity of the user was monitored using mobile
cell signal information; they found that increasing
awareness about physical activity encouraged reflection
upon one’s physical activity. These works suggest that
digital metaphors to visualize physical activity data have
the potential to motivate users to achieve health goals.
Visualization through physical metaphors

Along with digital metaphors, researchers have also
explored physical metaphors for representing physical
activity data. For example, Jafarinaimi et al. [18] created a
physical sculpture that provides feedback on sitting in a
proper posture. Recently, Khot et al. [19] and Stusak et al.
[40] designed 3D printed physical metaphors to represent
physical activity data in a material form; their
accompanying studies reveal that user relationship with
physical activity gets positively influenced with physical
metaphors. These works suggest that physical medium has
great potential to support the physical activity experience.
Visualization through informative art

Fan et al. [12] explored the feasibility of informative art by
designing and studying various abstract visualizations of
physical activity. They found that people have different
tastes when it comes to appreciating and relating to abstract
visualizations of their physical activity data. This work
suggests us to consider varied preferences of the users,
while designing visualization schemes.
Visualization through playful systems

Prior works have also utilized physical activity data to
enhance gameplay experiences and thereby, creating
opportunities for physical activities around playful systems.
For example, the Run Zombie Run [36] mobile app
harnesses an engaging game-based narrative to make users

jog more. Berkovsky et al. [3] have looked at virtual game
rewards in exchange of physical activity while Nenonen et
al. [28] utilized heart rate data as a game input. In other
works, TripleBeat system [29] allows runners to stay in
their target heart rate zones through virtual competition.
These works suggest the potential of a playful interface to
support the physical activity experience.
Rethinking physical activity representation

Review of the existing literature suggests that there is an
emphasis on using the digital medium to represent physical
activity, which not only limits the interaction opportunities
to visualization but also overlooks the multi-sensory aspect
of experiencing the physical activity data. Since physical
activity data can approximately reflect the amount of
energy invested by the user in a physical activity, we
believe there is an opportunity to harness this information
to contribute to the human energy cycle by “giving back to
the body what it has lost during physical activity”.
Supporting this, we introduce palatable representations that
turn physical activity data into an appetizing sports drink.
Since intense physical activity sessions can cause loss of
body fluids; sports drinks can help in the recovery of such
body fluids [37]. However, we are also aware that the
human energy-cycle is much more complex as the literature
on exercise and nutrition suggests [37]: We, therefore, do
not portray that a created sports drink exactly matches with
an hourly exercise, for instance. However, considering the
trends in quantified self [41] and food printing [38, 47], we
see an opportunity to combine the two. For example,
quantified self focuses on sensing energy expenditure,
whereas food printing focuses on new ways of producing
energy that can be consumed. We find this an intriguing
combination that we believe holds an exciting premise for
HCI.
To the best of our knowledge, there has not been any
exploration on using fluids to represent physical activity.
However, past works in HCI have explored fluids for
creating novel interactive experiences. For example, the
Currency Fountain [9] shows the currency rates using a
water fountain based display while Geurts et al. [17]
designed a Splash Controller for interactive play
experiences with water. Similarly, Steve Mann designed
various fluidic musical instruments such as the Water
Hammer Piano [25]. The Student Innovation Contest at
UIST 2013 featured various fluidic interaction possibilities
developed using the PumpSpark water fountain kit [11]. A
few other works explored the use of soap bubbles [42] as
well as water jets [33] for tangible interactions with
computer systems. These works illustrate the potential of
fluids in representing information and creating engaging
experiences. However, there has not been much exploration
on drinkable fluids except a system by Daisuke that
transforms backend web processing data into a drink [10].
In response, we propose TastyBeats as the first exploration
of using drinkable fluids to represent physical activity data.

WHAT IS TASTYBEATS?

TastyBeats is an interactive system that transforms heart
rate data of a physical activity into a personalized drink. We
employ a fountain-based interaction in the preparation of
the drink, which not only provides visualization of the
performed physical activity but also turns this event into a
spectacular and celebratory event.
The TastyBeats setup includes a central glass and four
containers as shown in Figure 1. Each container has a food
graded water pump [14] fitted at the bottom. These pumps
shoot drinks from the containers into the central glass
(Refer Figure 2) and are driven by Arduino [2]. Working of
the system is explained below.

Figure 2: TastyBeats in action.
Mapping heart rate data to different drinks

TastyBeats divides heart rate values into four zones
following Fletcher’s classification of physical activity
levels based on heart rate [13], however, the range of values
were slightly adjusted to suit the current interaction. Each
zone has a characteristic drink as explained below. In the
current prototype, we have used Mio liquid enhancers [26]
for preparing the drinks because they came in a variety of
flavors and they had zero sugar and zero calories. We want
to highlight that the use of sports drinks was mainly driven
from the interaction angle; we did not intend to advocate
sports drinks or the usefulness of them in relation to
physical activity.
1) Low activity zone: Water

The first zone is a low activity zone where the user is
mostly sedentary or doing light physical activities such as
standing and walking. This zone corresponds to a range of
heart rate values varying from 60 to 95 beats per minute
(bpm). Since there is not much physical activity happening
in this zone, we choose water to represent this zone.
2) Moderate activity zone: Light flavored water

The second zone describes aerobic activities corresponding
to a range of heart rate values from 96 to 130 bpm. We
choose light flavored water such as mango-peach flavor of
Mio liquid water enhancers to represent this zone.

3) High activity zone: Electrolytes

Third zone describes aerobic activities with high intensity
and corresponds to a range of heart rate values lying in
between 131 to 165 bpm. Such activities if done for a
longer duration may require electrolyte supplements [37].
We therefore choose Mio liquid enhancer containing
electrolytes to represent this zone.

(Figure 3). Below we mention the key topics we discussed
and how we came up with the final design of the system.

4) Intense activity zone: Rich flavored water

The fourth zone corresponds to intense physical activities
with heart rate values between 166 to 195 bpm that usually
do not last more than 10 minutes [37]. We choose a dark
red and rich flavored (Mio fruit punch flavor) drink to
describe its occurrence in a physical activity session.

Figure 3: Other design options for TastyBeats were discussed
but not considered due to a) less interaction possibility with
equidistant pumps, b) self-priming issue with the pumps.

Dynamics of the fluid spectacle

Arranging the containers (setup)

We use Polar H7 heart rate monitor [30] and its
accompanying smartphone app, Polar Beat to record the
heart rate data of a physical activity session. The Polar Beat
app saves the heart rate data on Polar website, from where
we download the heart rate data in XML format. TastyBeats
application written in Processing [31] then identifies the
pattern of heart rate zones from the XML file and sends this
pattern to the TastyBeats system via serial communication.
This pattern enumerates identified heart rate zones along
with their frequency. For example, for a set of heart rate
values: (69,75,83,102,150), the heart rate pattern would be
[(zone: 1, freq.: 3), (zone: 2, freq.: 1), (zone: 3, freq.: 1)].

Choosing the physical activity data

Initially, there were ideas about keeping all four containers
at equal distance from the central glass such as in a semicircular or square fashion (Figure 3a). However, we decided
to put the containers in a straight line around the central
glass (as shown in Figure 1) that offered us more interaction
flexibility. For example, containers that are further apart
from the central glass give higher elevation for the water
shoot than the ones that are closer to the central glass;
making it easier to see the differences in the heart rate while
witnessing the system interaction.

The TastyBeats system reads the pattern sequentially and
accordingly drives the pumps from the corresponding
containers. The pumps shoot the drink into the central glass
for 2 seconds, so that the central glass can accommodate
multiple shoots from every container. The central glass gets
full by 30 shoots with 400ml of drinks. Now, for a longer
physical activity session, 7-8 hours in our case, we
optimized our system so that it shoots drink only when the
pattern moves to a different zone. For example, if the heart
rate data stayed in the same zone, shooting happens only
once. The system stops when the pattern gets finished or the
glass gets filled with 30 shoots.

We chose heart rate as opposed to other physiological
measures such as METs and steps because heart rate is
more personal as well as dynamic. As a result, the chances
that the system would produce distinctly flavored drinks are
high. For example, an activity comprising of transitions
between low and moderate activity zones will add water
and light flavored water respectively into the central glass,
while an activity causing rapid transitions between different
zones will add more flavors as well as electrolytes to the
drink. From our study, we also found that using heart rate
enabled tracking of other psychological factors such as
stress, which we believe are also essential while
considering the overall well being of a person.

Design process and considerations

Creating the personalized drink

We have taken an incremental and exploratory approach for
designing the TastyBeats system where the data gathered
from one trial informed the system design for the next trial.
As such the design inquiry for TastyBeats was carried out
in three phases as explained below.
In the first phase, regular focus group discussions were held
with participants from the community surrounding our
research lab. The participants came from varied academic
backgrounds such as industrial design, computer science,
and HCI, which helped us to draw from their experience
and discuss advanced topics such as engaging aspects of a
palatable interface. Several design ideas were proposed for
the possible interface demonstrating the diversity in user
expectations as well as choices for an interactive setup

To create a personalized drink, different parameters such as
smell, texture, viscosity, and flavor were considered.
However, our design choices were limited due to the
hardware (pumps) available with us. As a result, we had to
discard some of the drink parameters. For example, the
pumps did not work with carbonated water, thus giving
texture to the drink was not feasible; Additionally, since the
pumps were not self-primed, they needed to be immersed in
liquid for pumping (Figure 3b). As a result, we looked only
at such parameters with which the pumps could work
successfully. We therefore utilized three parameters: flavor,
volume and color of the drink to create a meaningful
mapping between the physical activity data and created
drink. Flavor of the drink is based on the identified heart

rate zones in the data, while the recurring occurrence of
these zones within the data contributes to the volume of the
drink (which increases with the activity duration) thus
describing both quality as well as the quantity of the
activity. Finally, color is used to signify the highest reached
heart rate zone in the data, besides it also creates a visual
appeal to understand the data even from a distance.
In the second phase, we exhibited early versions of the
TastyBeats systems at three different academic venues
where more than 400 participants interacted with the
system. Each of these exhibitions helped us to refine our
design further by resolving issues such as food safety (using
materials that are food safe). Other findings from the
exhibitions are explained in [20]. In the final phase, we
field deployed the system in various houses to study its use
in everyday context, which we discuss in the next section.

poster explaining the study’s procedure (Figure 5). We also
provided sanitizers and napkins to clean the glasses and
accidental spilling of drinks. We also provided users with a
MacBook Air to run the TastyBeats system. Participants
were not compensated to participate and the system was
taken back at the end of the study. Following the cultural
probing practice [16], we also supplied diaries and asked
participants to reflect upon their experiences with the
system.

TASTYBEATS IN ACTION (FIELD STUDY)

We conducted an exploratory “in the wild” study [34] to
understand how TastyBeats will integrate into everyday
physical activity experiences and what effect it can have on
everyday physical activity. Given the exploratory nature of
this work, we focused on gathering a rich set of opinions
that illustrate reflective thinking about a system rather than
a majority.
Recruitment

The study took place in three households across a large
metropolitan city for a period of two weeks. In total, we had
six participants: 1 couple in mid thirties (Chad: 37 yrs.,
Male; Sarah: 34 yrs., Female), 1 couple in mid twenties
(Dave: 28 yrs., Male; Sarah: 26 yrs.) and two housemates
(Adam: 26 yrs. Male; Rahim: 29 yrs., Male). Our intention
behind using more than one participant from the same
house was to investigate the affect of palatable
representations on social dynamics as explored in previous
works on material representations [19, 40]. Figure 4
provides demographic details of the participants along with
their level of physical activity every week (low: 1-2 days,
moderate: 3-4 days, high: more than 4 days). All
participants had tried electrolytes-based sports drinks
before, but their main source of rehydration was water.

Figure 4: Demographic details of our study participants along
with their level of physical activity (PA).
Setup

Each house received a kit containing the TastyBeats
system, two Polar H7 heart rate monitors, two iPods and a

Figure 5: Each house received a kit containing the TastyBeats
system and a poster explaining the study’s procedure.
Procedure

We installed the TastyBeats system in every household at a
location of the participants’ choice (which we noted). We
first gave a demo on how the system works with dummy
data and explained the study procedure. We also printed an
A3 poster detailing the study steps (Figure 5), asking the
participants to perform the following tasks:
Tasks in the morning:

We asked the participants to wear the heart rate monitor and
start the recording of the heart rate data through the Polar
Beat application installed on the iPod. Usually the
recording started around 7-8 am when participants began
their day. We asked participants to continue their day as
usual which may or may not involve physical activity.
Tasks in the evening:

In the evening, usually around 5-6 pm, when participants
returned home from work, we told them to stop the Polar
Beat application on the iPod and take off the heart rate
monitor. Once the recording was stopped, the heart rate
data from the day was synced to the Polar website.
Participants then prepared the TastyBeats setup, which
involved pouring water into the four containers and adding
the liquid enhancers (two pinches) into three of them. We
then asked the participants to press a button that
downloaded the data and started the TastyBeats program on
the provided laptop. The program then started the
TastyBeats interaction, which involved shooting drinks into
the central glass based on the heart rate data. The
interaction lasted around 3-4 minutes. Finally, the
participant was free to taste the prepared drink.

Data source

The main source of data was the interview conducted at the
end of the study in participants’ home, which went for
about 45 to 60 minutes per participant. The post interviews
focused on participants’ experiences with the TastyBeats
system. We also utilized the diaries given to the participants
as well as photos and videos taken by the participants to
further support the interviews. We visited each household
two times (first and last day) and spent around 4 hours in
total with participants at each house. We also maintained
contact with everyone through emails and phone calls in
case they needed any technical support. We took notes and
recorded interviews, which were later coded and analyzed
for common themes using a grounded theory approach.
FINDINGS

Given the long time frame necessary to achieving health
benefits as a result of physical activity, it is often difficult to
judge the efficacy of short design-led study interventions
[5, 21]. Instead, it has been suggested that such
interventions should be judged based on their impact on
practices [5] and how they brought about changes in
people’s attitudes (rather than behaviors), fostering
mindfulness and leaving room for stories [32]. We describe
below key insights gained from the deployments.
Accommodating TastyBeats

All participants welcomed the system with curiosity and
considered it a part of their kitchen ambience. The system
occupied a space on the kitchen slab in both couples’ home
(Figure 6). Adam and Rahim, however, placed the system
in a private room as one of their other roommates had a cat
and they thought she might mess with the system.

time for the drink; sometimes they had it just after coming
back from work and some other times a little later.
Enjoying the interaction

All participants actively took part in making the drink
everyday and keenly observed how the drink was being
made through the fountain-based interaction. As such, the
system became a part of their daily routine. According to
Adam, the system was “something you always want to see,
once you come home”, to which Rose added, “its nice to see
the machine making a drink and the taste of the drink is
also very good, but it is also very healthy, that way you feel
good about it.” Along with the drink, the participants also
appreciated the interactive quality of the system: “the best
part of it is watching the interaction, shooting into the cup”,
Dave commented. Rose was delighted to see her heart rate
transformed into a drink, she mentioned, “compared to
regular apps with only show the data, this prepares the
drink, and that way its kind of special, it feels that you are
getting energy back.”
Taste as a surprise

Sarah mentioned, “Seeing the drink is one thing, but if it’s
the same color everyday, then there is no surprise. Surprise
is the taste, which is different on daily basis.”
Taste as a satisfaction

Chad also commented, “Tasting it [drink] adds an element
of satisfaction. It would have been less engaging if I was
not allowed to drink it.” Adam felt, “it is like drinking your
own progress, literally.”
Witnessing the interaction

Chad mentioned, “This (TastyBeats) is kind of neat where I
can see the different levels mixing in. You actually get to
interpret how active your day was based upon the drink
being mixed. So, I think its more of incentive to see it mixed
because you get a better understanding of why the drink is
the way it is.”
Relating TastyBeats to physical activity

Participants mentioned that the presented data in its fluid
form offered new insights into their physical activity
routines. As a result, they became more attentive to their
bodily responses and everyday activities.
Figure 6: The TastyBeats system was placed on the kitchen
slab in Dave and Rose’s house.
Experiencing TastyBeats

All participants tracked their data for around 7-8 hours
every day. The couples preferred to have their drink after
dinner usually around 9 pm. Dave mentioned that the drink
was like a personalized dessert or pleasurable treat for the
tiring day activity, while referring to the sweet taste of the
drink, Sarah said: “it is like having a grape juice before
going to bed”. Adam and Rahim did not have a preferred

Correlating activities to drink

Participants were able to correlate different days’ activities
with the drink that was created in the evening, which in turn
encourage them to try new physical activities. Rose tried
different physical activities such as running, cycling and
household cleaning on different days. She was able to
differentiate how her heart rate data in these activities was
reflected in the drink. Rahim confirmed this by saying: “I
did see the differences [in the drink], when I had a more
active day, there were subtle changes in the taste.”

Identifying bodily warning signals

The dark rich flavored drink that Sarah received on three
consecutive sedentary days made her realize that she had
very high heart rates. She told her husband about it and
consequently they looked up the Internet to learn about
“normal” heart rate values and possible reasons for higher
values. They then tried to swap around the heart rate
monitors on the next day to see if there was a fault with it.
Sarah said: “What it [TastyBeats] made me aware of was
my heart rate. It is not something that I think of. When I
saw my high heart rate [through the dark red colored
drink], I felt my pulse for the first time. It made me think
about the reasons and found that medication is one of the
factors [she was on a medication for a while during the
study period].”
Motivating to exercise

A recurrent theme was the motivating quality of the system,
linking to the theme of fulfilling the energy-cycle.
Participants reported that the system encouraged them to
not miss their daily workouts. Rose said: “Just to see what
drinks you get and how much, you feel like going out and
running, sometimes it’s like an inspiration.” Adam
responded similarly, “it motivated me to exercise more”.
On a sedentary day, Chad received a drink containing
mostly water, to which he replied, “It was little bit
frustrating to get watery drink, but it was not unexpected.
That kind of motivated me for more physical exercise the
next day to get drinks from level 3 and 4.”
Taking health more seriously

Dave spoke extensively about how TastyBeats made him be
more serious about his as well as his wife’s health. He said,
“I will continue cycling to work from now onwards”. Other
participants also reported that the system encouraged them
to not miss their daily workouts. Dave, Rose and Chad
started walking or cycling to the work instead of driving.
Social dynamics around TastyBeats

Participants said that they often prepared their drinks
together, laughing and discussing their activities with each
other. Usually participants saw each other only in the
evening. As such they did not know precisely how active
the other person was during the day: The understanding
came by watching the interaction when other person’s drink
was being made. Chad said in the interview, “it's good that
me and Sarah doing it [the study] together, as we get to see
each other’s heart rate from the drinks being made” [with a
smile], “in that way, Sarah now knows much more about me
and my activities.”
Facilitating competition

Adam felt the system was highly competitive: he competed
with Rahim in terms of who will burn more calories and get
a better drink. He narrated to us a funny incident that
happened during the study. “On Saturday, I stayed at home
reading and watching TV, I did not go anywhere, but my

friend Rahim went and played some sport [football with
friends] and did some jogging and stuff like that, so it was
physically very active day for him and for me it was very
very inactive, just the opposite. When he came back, we did
our drinks [together]. We started with him and his drink
was pretty amazing and very concentrated, using lot of
drink from [container] 3 and 4 and almost nothing from 1.
After that it was my turn, since there was no activity by me,
I did not get anything, just a little bit of water [from
container 1] and nothing from the other. It was just funny.
It was so obvious that he did lot of activities and I got what
I deserved. So we started laughing, it was so fun!”
Cheating felt bad (tasteless)

Adam further added, “later on the same day, when we were
having dinner, I felt like having a drink. So what I did, I
cheated the system. I uploaded Rahim’s data and got the
same drink that he got. Kind of funny that he did the
activities and I got the drink. But actually to be honest, it
didn’t feel good at all, I felt that what I told Rahim too, you
know what, this drink is personal, I feel like it is yours and I
am drinking it. It feels like drinking something that does not
belong to me. So it did not taste good, really honestly.”
Creating personal affection with drinks

Participants from the other houses also felt that the drink
was personal to them and is not something to be shared:
Rose said, “sharing my drink with others is a bit weird, I
will tell others about it [my drink], but I will not share the
drink, definitely.” Additionally, Chad was interested to store
the drink from his intense workouts so that he can cherish
those activities for a longer time.
Appreciating TastyBeats

Most participants spoke enthusiastically about the system as
well as about their participation in the study with their
friends. To our surprise, Adam maintained voice memos to
log his as well as Rahim’s interactions with the system.
Appreciating the palatability

During the follow-up interviews, we discussed various
possible scenarios in which part of the interaction was
missing. We asked what if we take away the palatable
aspect by just mixing colorful water based on heart rate
data. To which, all participants responded negatively. Chad
said, “It would probably be less of incentive especially
when you are wearing the heart rate monitor for exercise
and at last you can’t drink it. It is like producing something
but you won’t get a reward out of it, other than some water
which you can’t keep with you” Dave worried that, “Having
a drink is something like a reward for what you have done.
But if it was just water, which you have to throw away, the
beauty of interaction would have disappeared.”
Waiting for the rewards

Rahim narrated us the following story, “one day I came
home running from my office, I was exhausted and needed

something to drink, I could have picked something from the
fridge, but instead I poured the drink into the glasses and
then drank it once the interaction was over, that way I knew
what my heart rate was.” Chad further added, “If I was
thirsty, it’s a little bit frustrating that you have to set it up
and then you have to wait. But seeing the interaction is also
rewarding.”
Welcoming the abstract visualizations

Dave appreciated the abstract nature of TastyBeats and
mentioned, “for a non athlete like me, detailed data does
not make much sense, once in a while you may want to
know what your heart rate details are, but on a daily basis
abstract interpretation of data is good enough”.
Issues with TastyBeats

Along with the positives, participants also mentioned a few
issues with the system that needs to be addressed.
Cumbersome heart rate monitoring

Rose and Sarah found wearing the heart rate monitor for the
whole day as cumbersome. Sarah said, “You need a little bit
of discipline for putting it on everyday during the rush
hours in the morning.” To which, Adam proposed a
solution: “Eventually I will come to know what drink I get
for what activity. So next time when I had a similar activity,
I can just look back in history and plug in the data to get a
similar drink, that way I do not need to wear the heart rate
monitor or the similar activities.”
Irregular size drinks

In our system, volume of the drink was based on the
duration of physical activity and its type. As participants’
activities varied during the study period, they received
drinks of different volume. However, Dave did not like
getting drinks of different volumes, and wished for a
standard size drink irrespective of the duration of his
physical activity.
The leftovers

Participants did not like the fact that containers were open
from the top, which led to the wastage of the leftover
drinks. Dave and Adam asked if the system could be sealed
from the top so that they can reuse the remaining drinks
rather than throwing them out.
The spilling

The system occasionally spilled drink on nearby surfaces,
which was not appreciated by participants, as it required
cleaning and led to wasting of food. Rose said, “Little
droplets are okay. But not too much.”
DISCUSSIONS

We discuss below the experiences that the palatable
representations of physical activity elicited for our
participants.

Rewarding aspects of palatable representations

According to the Goal Setting Theory [24], incentives are
important to sustain a user’s interest in an activity. Previous
works in HCI have looked on virtual rewards and incentives
to support physical activity among people [3]. However,
according to the study by Munson and Consolvo [27],
virtual points and rewards do not have a lasting impact
because system assigned rewards are found to support
motivation only in the early stages of usage. Therefore, it
may be worthwhile to consider a greater scope of reward
types. Possibly, rewards that change over time can be a
valuable benefit for physical activity.
In this work, we explore this dimension through an
appetizing drink and a visceral spectacle of creating the
drink, both of which participants found equally rewarding.
In case of Chad, even though he was dehydrated due of
cycling, he waited for the interaction to end to get a
deserving drink. Participants find watching the interaction
as the best part of TastyBeats, and were very keen to
witness the interaction not only for their own but also for
their partner’s everyday activity. Furthermore, participants
also developed a personal affection with their drink mainly
because the drink embodied their personal data. Rose was
motivated to perform different physical activities to see
how it would reflect in the drink and what it taste like. One
participant, Adam, even tried to cheat the system by
creating drink from his friend’s data, but that drink did not
taste good for him. Lastly, there was always a surprise
element associated with how the drink will taste. We
therefore encourage designers to equally focus on the
interaction aspects as well as the palatability of the resultant
drink while designing palatable representation.
Shared spectacle of personal data triggers discussions
and playful interactions

Most of the existing works in visualizing physical activity
is geared towards individual use [41]. Physical activity data
is often collected and shown on a private computer or
smartphone screen. In this work, we explored public display
of data in a private setting like home through a shared
system of creating a drink. Often the drink was made
together and participants keenly observed the process of
making the drink. In that process, they became more aware
of each other’s physiological state, which in turn triggered
discussions and playful social interactions. Participants
often competed to get a bigger drink and shared moments of
laughter when the prepared drinks were drastically different
from each other. Recently, a few other works have also
started to explore public consumption of heart rate data. For
example, Walmink et al. [46] created an augmented helmet
that project heart rate data of the wearer in real time to
fellow cyclists while Curmi et al. [8] allowed public display
of heart rate data on social networks. These works illustrate
potential for social interaction in public sharing of data but
with a risk of privacy. However, in our study, participants
did not raise privacy concern, as the data was presented in
an abstract form. Therefore, one way to address privacy

related issues could be to use such abstract forms of
visualizations that provides basic information about the
physical activity, but hides intrinsic details from the user.
Finally, making data public with fluids means that there are
chances of spillage, which can be fun, but we found that
participants did not like wasting food (drinks in our case).
Therefore, there is a tradeoff in terms of the spectacle and
the palatable quality of the drink.
STUDY LIMITATIONS

Here, we mention the two main limitations of this work.
Firstly, TastyBeats creates a drink only at the end of the
day. There are situations when such a drink might be
needed right after a physical activity, which was not
supported by the current version of TastyBeats. Secondly,
our study reports results from a 2 weeks intervention.
Longitudinal studies might be needed before drawing
conclusions on the motivational aspects of the system.
Despite these limitations, we believe our work offers first
insights into a palatable representation that could inform the
design of future systems aiming to support human energy
cycle through palatable representation.
CONCLUSION

Main contribution of this work is the first conceptual
understanding of the design of palatable representations.
We presented results from an “in the wild” field
deployments of the TastyBeats system that offers insights
into how people understand and react to personal data when
presented in a palatable form. TastyBeats served as a
mediator for reflective thoughts and discussions besides
offering a public and vibrant vista of their heart rate.
Recent advancements in food printing have opened up new
possibilities for creating engaging interactions and
experiences around food [6, 38, 39, 47]. However, existing
explorations mainly utilize mechanical and time-consuming
techniques to produce food. Through this work, we explore
another dimension of producing personalized food using a
vibrant, attractive and familiar setting of water fountains,
which we think would guide designers towards thinking
differently about food printing methods.
Our work also intertwines the two growing fields in HCI,
namely, quantified self and food printing, thus it might raise
issues on their relationship and relevance. Our work also
informs the design of food printing machines, highlighting
an opportunity to print things “we do not currently have”,
like heart rate. Our work brings to the fore the idea that one
can eat one’s own data such as heart rate. This might inspire
a discussion of the role of HCI in the human-energy cycle.
In future, it would also be interesting to see how TastyBeats
is applicable in other settings such as in gymnasiums or
public events like marathons. Finally, our work has
scratched only the surface of palatable representation, and
we encourage designers to consider new possibilities

afforded by such representations to support user’s
experience with physical activity.
REFERENCES

1. Anderson, I., Maitland, J., Sherwood, S. Shakra:
Tracking and Sharing Daily Activity Levels with
Unaugmented Mobile Phones. Mobile Networks and
Applications 12, (2007), 185-199.
2. Arduino, http://www.arduino.cc/.
3. Berkovsky, S., Coombe, M., Freyne, J., Bhandari, D.,
and Baghaei, N. Physical activity motivating games:
virtual rewards for real activity. In Proc. CHI’10, ACM
(2010), 243-252.
4. Bloch, M. Truth and sight: Generalizing without
universalizing. J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst, 14, 2008, 22-32.
5. Brynarsdttir, H., Håkansson, M., Pierce, J., Baumer, E.
P. S., Disalvo, C. and Sengers, P. Sustainably
unpersuaded: how persuasion narrows our vision of
sustainability. In Proc. CHI’12, ACM (2012), 947-956.
6. Comber R., Choi, J.H., Hoonhout J. and O'hara, K.
Editorial: Designing for human-food interaction: An
introduction to the special issue on 'food and interaction
design', IJHCS, 2014, 72(2), 181-184.
7. Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W. and Landay, J. Theorydriven design strategies for technologies that support
behavior change in everyday life. In Proc. CHI’09,
ACM (2009), 405-414.
8. Curmi, F., Ferrario, M.A., Southern, J., and Whittle, J.
HeartLink: open broadcast of live biometric data to
social networks. In Proc. CHI’13, ACM (2013), 17491758.
9. Currency fountain.
http://www.koert.com/work/datafountain/.
10. Daisuke, A. Weburette. In Proc. SA’12, ACM (2012).
11. Dietz, P., Reyes, G., and Kim, D. The PumpSpark
fountain development kit. In Proc. DIS’14, ACM
(2014), 259-266.
12. Fan, C., Forlizzi, J. and Dey, A. A Spark Of Activity:
Exploring Information Art As Visualization For
Physical Activity. In Proc. Ubicomp ’12, ACM (2012),
81-84.
13. Fletcher G., Balady G., Amsterdam E., et al. Exercise
standards for testing and training: a statement for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2001, 1694-1740.
14. Food grade mini water pump.
http://www.lightobject.com/High-temperature100-39CDC-12V-185LMin-29GPH-mini-Water-Pump-Foodgrade-P711.aspx.
15. Galesic, M., and Garcia-Retamero, R. Graph literacy: A
crosscultural comparison. Medical Decision Making,
2011, 31, 444-457.

16. Gaver, W., Dunne, A., and Pacenti, E. Cultural Probes.
Interactions, 1999, 21-29.

technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal
weight. In Proc. CHI’11, ACM (2011), 423–432.

17. Geurts, L., and Vanden Abeele, V. Splash controllers:
game controllers involving the uncareful manipulation
of water. In Proc. TEI’12, ACM (2012), 183-186.

33. Richter, H., Manke, F., and Seror, M. LiquiTouch:
liquid as a medium for versatile tactile feedback on
touch surfaces. In Proc. TEI’13, ACM (2013), 315-318.

18. Jafarinaimi, N., Forlizzi, J., Hurst, A. and Zimmerman,
J. Breakaway: an ambient display designed to change
human behavior, In Proc. CHI EA’05, ACM (2005),
1945-1948.

34. Rogers, Y. Interaction Design Gone Wild: Striving for
Wild Theory. Interactions 18, 4, 2011, 58-62.

19. Khot, R., Hjorth, L., and Mueller, F. Understanding
physical activity through 3D printed material artifacts.
In Proc. CHI’14, ACM (2014), 3835-3844.

35. Ruckenstein, M. Visualized and Interacted Life:
Personal Analytics and Engagements with Data
Doubles. Societies, (2014), 4, 68–84.
36. Run zombie run, https://www.zombiesrungame.com/.

20. Khot, R., Lee, J., Hjorth, L. and Mueller, F. TastyBeats:
Celebrating Heart Rate Data with a Drinkable Spectacle.
In Proc. TEI’15, ACM (2015), 229-232.

37. Sawka M., Burke L., Eichner E., Maughan R., Montain
S., and Stachenfeld N. American College of Sports
Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid
replacement. Med Sci Sports Exerc. (2007), 39, 377-90.

21. Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., and Pratt, W. How to evaluate
technologies for health behavior change in HCI
research. In Proc. CHI’11, ACM (2011), 3063-3072.

38. Schoning, J., Rogers, Y., and Kruger, A. Digitally
Enhanced Food. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 2012,
11(3), 4-6.

22. Li, I., Dey, A. and Forlizzi, J. Understanding my data,
myself: supporting self-reflection with ubicomp
technologies. In Proc. UbiComp '11, ACM (2011), 405414.

39. Spence, C. and Piqueras-Fiszman, B. Technology at the
dining table. Flavour, 2013, 2 (1), 16.

23. Lin, J.L., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G. and
Strub, H.B. Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging physical activity
with an interactive computer game. In Proc.
Ubicomp’06, Springer (2006), 261-278.

40. Stusak, S., Tabard, A., Sauka, F., Khot, R., Butz, A.
Activity Sculptures: Exploring the Impact of Physical
Visualizations on Running Activity. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE, 99 (1), 2014.

24. Locke, E., and Latham, G. A theory of goal setting and
task performance, Prentice Hall, 1990.

41. Swan, M. Sensor mania! The Internet of things,
wearable computing, objective metrics, and the
Quantified Self 2.0. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2012, 1,
217–253.

25. Mann, S., Janzen, R., Huang, J., Kelly, M., Ba, L. J., and
Chen, A. User-interfaces Based on the Water-hammer
Effect: Water-hammer Piano As an Interactive
Percussion Surface. In Proc. TEI ’11, ACM (2011), 1-8.

42. Sylvester, A., Döring, T., and Schmidt, A. Liquids,
Smoke, and Soap Bubbles - Reflections on Materials for
Ephemeral User Interfaces. In Proc. TEI’10, ACM
(2010), 269-270.

26. Mio liquid water enhancers,
http://www.makeitmio.com/.

43. Tudor-Locke, C., Bassett, B.R., and Swartz, A.M. A
preliminary study of one year of pedometer selfmonitoring. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 2004, 158162.

27. Munson, S. and Consolvo, S. Exploring Goal-setting,
Rewards, Self-monitoring, and Sharing to Motivate
Physical Activity, Pervasive Health (2012), 25-32.
28. Nenonen, V., Lindblad, A., Häkkinen, V., Laitinen, T.,
Jouhtio, M., and Hämäläinen, P. Using heart rate to
control an interactive game. In Proc. CHI’07, ACM
(2007), 853-856.
29. Oliveira, R., and Oliver, N. TripleBeat: enhancing
exercise performance with persuasion. In Proc.
MobileHCI '08, ACM (2008), 255-264.
30. Polar heart rate monitors,
http://www.polar.com/en/products.
31. Processing, https://processing.org.
32. Purpura, S., Schwanda, V., Williams, K., Stubler, W.,
and Sengers, P. Fit4life: the design of a persuasive

44. Vande Moere, A. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel:
Exploring the physicality of information visualization.
In Proc. IV’08, IEEE (2008), 469-474.
45. Viseu, A., and Suchman, L. Wearable Augmentations:
Imaginaries of the Informed Body. In Technologized
Images, Technologized Bodies, Berghahn Books, 2010,
161–184.
46. Walmink, W., Wilde, D., and Mueller, F. Displaying
heart rate data on a bicycle helmet to support social
exertion experiences. In Proc. TEI’14, ACM (2014), 97104.
47. Wei, J., Ma, X., and Zhao, S. Food Messaging: Using an
Edible Medium for Social Messaging. In Proc. CHI’14,
ACM (2014), 2873-2882.

