Data Craft: Integrating Data into Daily
Practices and Shared Reflections
Alice Thudt

Abstract

University of Calgary

We explore data craft as a means to create mementos
that integrate data about personal and shared
experiences into people’s everyday lives. Digital
mementos, e.g., in form of visualizations, aim to
support personal and joint reminiscing by leveraging
personal data archives. However, their digital nature
can complicate value construction and integration with
social and everyday practices. We propose to consider
data craft—the manual crafting of functional objects
that incorporate personal visualizations—as an
opportunity to create meaningful physical objects. We
suggest that the manual creation and habitual use of
these objects adds to their perceived value and
authenticity and can spark recollection based on digital
traces of personal and shared experiences. We
illustrate the concept of data craft through examples
and reflect on the resulting objects as keepsakes and
gifts that strengthen social relationships.

Calgary, AB, Canada
alice.thudt@googlemail.com
Uta Hinrichs
University of St Andrews
St Andrews, Scotland, UK
uh3@st-andrews.ac.uk
Sheelagh Carpendale
University of Calgary
Calgary, AB, Canada
sheelagh@ucalgary.ca

Paste the appropriate copyright/license statement here. ACM now
supports three different publication options:
• ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the
historical approach.
• License: The author(s) retain copyright, but ACM receives an
exclusive publication license.
• Open Access: The author(s) wish to pay for the work to be open
access. The additional fee must be paid to ACM.
This text field is large enough to hold the appropriate release statement
assuming it is single-spaced in Verdana 7 point font. Please do not
change the size of this text box.
Each submission will be assigned a unique DOI string to be included here.

Author Keywords
Personal Visualization; Crafting; Data Physicalization

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Miscellaneous;

Introduction
Mementos and family heirlooms are among people's
most cherished personal objects [2]. They signify

Figure 1. The defining
characteristics of data craft.

Figure 2. Felted pillowcases by
Kim Rees visualizing dreams and
personal accomplishments [10]
(Image courtesy of Kim Rees).

Figure 3. Conceptual knitting
creates patterns from real world
occurrences. This hat shows
different events during the TVshow “Saved by the Bell” [4]
(Image courtesy of Lee
Meredith).

important relationships and aid people in the
construction of meaning and identity through personal
and joint reminiscing [2]. Access to unprecedented
amounts of data about people's lives provides a
potentially rich resource for reminiscing. However,
sharing such data with others and deriving meaning
from it is still a challenge [11]. For example, while
people sometimes print digital photos, giving
quantitative data (e.g., communication or location
histories) a physical presence at home and making it
accessible to all family members is more difficult.
Previous research has highlighted integration with
everyday practices and discoverability [5,8,9],
permanence [7], and authenticity [6,7,9] as important
qualities of physical mementos. However, we still lack
means to create mementos from digital data that
incorporate these characteristics.
We propose data craft as a way to create meaningful
physical mementos based on digital records of personal
and shared experiences. Data craft incorporates the
qualities of physical mementos and invites reflection
and reminiscing. In data craft, people create functional
objects that incorporate visual representations of their
digital records. This practice creates an association of
the object with a memorable experience or a loved
person. The habitual use of the crafted everyday
objects integrates data and the memories it represents
with people's existing practices. Their physicality allows
these objects to become lasting gifts or family
heirlooms that can be rediscovered and shared on a
daily basis. The process of manual crafting can further
add to the objects’ perceived value and authenticity.

The Concept of Data Craft
Crafting has a long tradition of capturing personal,
family, and cultural histories within functional objects

(see, e.g., quilting) [1,15]. To expand such reflective
practices, we explore the concept of data craft as a way
to incorporate data into crafting. Crafted everyday
objects are enhanced with visualizations of personal
data to facilitate reflection on otherwise hidden traces
of people’s experiences and relationships. We define
data craft as a practice at the intersection of personal
visualization and manual crafting to create physical and
functional mementos (see Fig. 1).
Data craft includes traditional crafts such as felting
(Fig. 2 [10]), knitting (Fig. 3 [4]) or pottery (Fig. 4 –
6). The concept (1) describes an approach to integrate
people’s digital data with their everyday activities and
(2) contributes to the areas of personal visualization,
physicaliziation, and digitally enhanced crafting. In the
following, we define characteristics of data craft in
relation to valued qualities of mementos. We then
describe data pottery as an example case of data craft.
Making Abstract Personal Data Visible & Graspable
A key characteristic of data craft is the use of personal
digital records such as activity logs, communication or
location histories. Previous work on personal
visualization and visual analytics has advocated for
visual representations to make personal data accessible
and interpretable [3]. Visualizations can promote
reminiscing and storytelling while protecting the privacy
of sensitive data [3,14]. Data craft takes personal
visualizations into the physical realm, e.g., in form of
decorations for functional objects. In this way data craft
integrates personal visualizations directly with objects
people encounter and share in their daily lives.
Enhancing Functional Everyday Objects
Data craft aims to integrate data with people’s shared
and personal practices by creating objects that serve

established functions. Previous work has shown that
people often choose such mundane objects as
mementos [8,9]. A mementos’ frequent use by
different family members adds to its accrued value
[5,8,9]. Discoverability and permanence are valued
qualities of physical mementos [5,7,8,9]: People often
place physical mementos of shared experiences in
visible locations where they can be easily accessed
[5,8]. Their physicality allows them to become lasting
parts of people's identities [7], and to be passed down
multiple generations or given as gifts [8]. In contrast,
people tend to experience digital data as individual
possessions, as “more ephemeral”, ”unstable” [9], and
prone to loss and fragmentation [7]. Data craft
addresses this by integrating visualizations of this data
with everyday objects. The resulting objects allow for
spontaneous encounters and shared experiences with
quantified data. The decorative visualizations can spark
reminiscing and sharing memories of relationships and
past events.
Manual Crafting
Previous research has explored digital fabrication to
create physical representations of personal data for
reflective purposes [12,13]. In contrast, data craft
focuses on manual creation processes. In fact, in data
craft reflection and reminiscing are not just supported
by the resulting artifact, but also deeply engrained in
the creation process of this artifact. Effort and personal
investment add to the perceived value of crafted
objects [2,15]. In data craft visual exploration and
encoding become part of the crafting process. This
engagement with data and associated memories makes
data craft a deeply reflective activity. Previous studies
found that people often choose idiosyncratic objects as
mementos [9]. Typically, such objects are unique and

not reproducible [6,7,9]. The manual process of data
craft leads to such unique and authentic artifacts.
The concept of data craft adds new perspectives to
works in personal visualization and physicalization for
shared reflection and storytelling, and it inspires new
ways of engaging with data through traditional crafts.

Reflecting on Relationships through Data
Pottery
Data pottery is one example of data craft where
tableware is created in clay and then decorated with
visual patterns based on personal data. Below we
present three artifacts crafted by our first author Alice
Thudt. We describe how these ‘data pots’ signify
important relationships and shared experiences and
invite joint reminiscing, reflection and social interaction.
PARENTS’ CALL BOWLS: The two bowls shown in Figure 5
represent Alice’s relationship with her parents based on
their Skype call history since she moved away from
home. Both bowls show calls on a three-year timeline:
on one bowl, each call is depicted as a line; on the
other bowl calls are shown as dots with one dot
representing 5 minutes of call time. One bowl was
intended as a gift to her parents and the other one to
be kept by herself. The patterns highlight how Alice and
her parents maintained close contact while apart.
Cereal bowls are objects that they use every morning,
which ensures daily encounters with the data and their
meaning. As Alice states, her intention was for the
bowls to act as a reminder to keep in touch with each
other frequently.
LOVE TEAPOT: The teapot is a memento of Alice’s
relationship with her partner. It depicts text messages
containing the word “love” that they exchanged since
the beginning of their relationship (see Fig. 6). Each

Figure 5. Cereal bowls
representing Skype-call history
with parents.

Figure 6. Teapot visualizing
instant messages containing the
word "love".

Figure 7. Bowl showing route of a
shared trip with a friend.

dotted line represents one year; one dot stands for
10 messages. The visualization shows the progression
from a long-distance relationship where the couple
often expressed their love through texts, to recent
years when living together allowed them to
communicate directly. Alice: “I chose a teapot for this
memento because it is a shared object that allows us to
have a cup of tea together while pondering the
development of our relationship.”
MORAY COASTAL TRAIL BOWL: The bowl shown in Figure 7
is a crafted souvenir of a shared trip with a friend. It
shows destinations on a trail Alice and her friend hiked
together in Scotland. The two glazes on the bowl mark
the coastline they walked, while the white dots on the
glaze line represent locations where they stopped to
camp for a night. Alice: “This bowl resembles the shape
of a bowl we used during the hike and thus creates
additional associations with the memories of the trip. I
crafted the bowl as a gift for my friend, to remind her
of our joint adventure.”
Below Alice further reflects on her data pottery practice
and describes how she creates everyday tableware that
reflect her relationships with friends and family to spark
(shared) reminiscing.
Reflective Design and Crafting Process
“For me, crafting a ‘data pot’ is driven by the personal
data that I want to turn into a memento and who I
want to share it with. I decide on the associations and
encounters I want to enable and take the personality of
the pot’s recipient into consideration. This influences
the shape and function of the pot I make as well as
how it visually reflects the data. Looking through my
data records is part of a reflective process that often
sparks memories or emotions. Trying to create patterns

that evoke associations with the events or people, I
explore possible data visualizations digitally and
through sketching. I do not include legends so the pots
reveal their meaning only to insiders or through
storytelling. My goal is to craft objects that value past
experiences and create opportunities for meaningful
interactions with the data, my loved ones and our
shared stories. I decide on the form and function of
each pot to evoke associations with a specific
experience or person, to support activities that allow for
episodes of reminiscing, or to encourage social
interactions. As a final step, I shape the pot in clay and
apply the visual pattern. This process is driven by my
reflections on the data, my memories as well as the
materials which influence my design.”

Conclusion
Data craft allows people to create meaningful personal
artifacts and shared mementos that can be used in
daily from digital records. Both the manual crafting
process and the resulting physical artifact create
opportunities for reflection and sharing memories.
Focusing on the creation of functional everyday objects,
data craft shapes opportunities to integrate personal
digital data into everyday life where they can be
serendipitously re-encountered and used together.
Manual crafting invites the crafter to reflect and
connect with the memories present in the data and the
emerging object and gives the objects authenticity and
a personal touch. Data craft can be integrated into a
range of traditional crafting practices; we have
presented data pottery as one of them. Future work will
investigate ways to support crafters in incorporating
data into their creative process, explore other means of
making and empirically study the impact of data craft
on personal and shared reflection.

References
1.

Amelon, J. J. 2011. Memory, Identity and the
Rhetoric of Quilts. Ph.D. Dissertation, Old Dominion
University.
2. Csikszenthmihalyi, M., & Rochberg-Halton, E. 1981.
The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the
Self. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK.
3. Huang, D., Tory, M., Aseniero, B. A., Bartram, L.,
Bateman, S., Carpendale, S., Tang, A., Woodbury,
R. (2015). Personal Visualization and Personal
Visual Analytics. IEEE TVCG 21(3), 420–433.
4. Meredith, L. 2009. Game Knitting. Retrieved on Jan
18, 2017 from: http://www.ravelry.com/patterns/
library/game-knitting
5. Nunes, M., Greenberg, S., & Neustaedter, C. 2009.
Using physical memorabilia as opportunities to
move into collocated digital photo-sharing. Journal
of Human Computer Studies, 67, 1087–1111.
6. Odom, W., Pierce, J., Stolterman, E., & Blevis, E.
2009. Understanding why we preserve some things
and discard others in the context of interaction
design. Proc. CHI, 1053–1062.
7. Odom, W., Zimmerman, J., & Forlizzi, J. 2014.
Placelessness, spacelessness, and formlessness:
experiential qualities of virtual possessions. Proc.
DIS, 985–994. .
8. Petrelli, D., Whittaker, S., & Brockmeier, J. 2008.
AutoTopography: What Can Physical Mementos Tell
us about Digital Memories? Proc. CHI
9. Petrelli, D., & Whittaker, S. 2010. Family memories
in the home: Contrasting physical and digital
mementos. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing.
153–169.
10. Rees, K. 2016. Touching Data (Oct 20, 2016).
Retrieved on Jan 18, 2017 from:
http://www.periscopic.com/news/touching-data
11. Sellen, A. J., Whittaker, S., & Sellen, B. A. 2010.
Beyond total capture: a constructive critique of lifelogging. Communications of the ACM, 53:70–77.
12. Stusak, S., Tabard, A., Sauka, F., Khot, R., & Butz,
A. 2014. Activity Sculptures: Exploring the Impact

of Physical Visualizations on Running Activity. IEEE
TVCG, 20(12), 2201–2210.
13. Swaminathan, S., Shi, C., Jansen, Y., Dragicevic,
P., Oehlberg, L. a., & Fekete, J.-D. 2014.
Supporting the design and fabrication of physical
visualizations. Proc. CHI, 3845–3854.
14. Thudt, A., Baur, D., Huron, S., & Carpendale, S.
2016. Visual Mementos: Reflecting Memories with
Personal Data. IEEE TVCG, 22(1), 369–378.
15. Velde, B.P., 1999. The language of crafts.
Activities: Reality and symbol, pp.95-106.
Alice Thudt is a PhD candidate in Computational Media
Design, pursuing her research at the InnoVis Group at
the University of Calgary. She is interested in using
visualization to create personally meaningful artefacts
from personal data. Recent projects have explored
visualizations for autobiographical storytelling, the
design of visualizations to reflect autobiographical
memories, as well as the creation of visual mementos.
Uta Hinrichs is a Lecturer at the University of St
Andrews. Her work focuses on designing and studying
the use and experience of interactive systems that
facilitate the exploration of (cultural) data collections
from academic, leisurely, and artistic perspectives.
Sheelagh Carpendale is a professor at the University
of Calgary where she holds a Canada Research Chair in
Information Visualization and the NSERC/AITF/SMART
Industrial Research Chair in Interactive Technologies.
Her research draws upon her combined backgrounds in
computer science and art. By studying how people
interact with information she works towards designing
more natural and accessible data representations. She
combines information visualization and HCI with
innovative new interaction techniques to better support
the everyday practices of people who are viewing,
representing, and interacting with information.

