Challenges of Running Constructive
Visualization Studies with Children
Abstract
Fearn Bishop

ᚃ

Uta Hinrichs

SACHI Group

SACHI Group

University of St Andrews

University of St Andrews

St Andrews, Fife, Scotland

St Andrews, Fife, Scotland

fab3@st-andrews.ac.uk

uh3@st-andrews.ac.uk

Previous work has shown that physical materials such
as simple plastic tokens can be used to study novices’
rich and diverse processes of mapping abstract data to
visual constructs [e.g. 2] which, in turn, can shed light
onto sense-making processes and inform the design of
visualization tools. Our research focuses on exploring
children’s approaches to visual mapping of abstract
data. We have run a constructive vis study where we
observed 7-11 year olds construct visualizations using
physical tokens. While this study brought forth
interesting findings, we also came across several
methodological challenges related to the choice of data,
study tasks, choice of material, and the study
environment. We discuss how we approached these
challenges in our study design and the questions this
raises in the areas of pedagogy and physicalization.

Author Keywords

Figure 1: Children participating in the study at a table, with
tokens, pencils and rulers set to the side and a paper canvas to
work on.

Constructive visualization; Data Physicalization;
Visualization authoring; Visualization construction;
Novices; Children.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Miscellaneous.

Introduction
Data visualization can facilitate sense-making processes
and problem solving. Recent work has investigated
how novices engage in visual mapping processes as
part of sense-making to better understand (1) the
process itself and (2) how to facilitate it through
visualization tools [2,3]. The simplicity of physical
tokens features and use, and their flexibility, make
them suitable for studies with visualization novices, as
has been seen with previous studies applying the
constructive visualization approach [1,2,7].
It is no coincident that children are taught numerical
concepts using physical objects [7]. Studies show that
they use such objects to support offloading cognition,
allowing the child to process more information, and to
provide conceptual metaphors which help the child
understand certain concepts by highlighting parallels
between the concept and the surrogate objects [4].
However, apart from such studies on using tangible
tokens to facilitate math education, we know
surprisingly little about how children use visual
representations as part of sense-making and problem
solving. At a time where children are introduced to the
concept of abstract data and even visualization tools
such as Excel at an early age, this is a problem.

Figure 2: A range of
visualizations created by children
from highly pictorial(top) to
highly abstract(bottom)

We have started to investigate children’s visual
mapping processes following a constructive vis
approach using physical tokens. While we found
physical tokens to be a suitable medium for rapidly
engaging children into such vis construction tasks,
running such studies with children is a challenge, and
attention must be put on the choice of vis material,
data, the study task and the study environment. Much
more than in studies with adults these choices influence
child participants’ interpretation of and engagement in

the tasks, which can influence study outcomes. We
describe our experiences running a constructive vis
study using physical tokens with children, and discuss
how we approached methodological challenges and the
questions these raise in this young research area.

Studying Children’s Vis Construction
We conducted a study with 22 children aged 7-11 (11
female, 11 male). Study sessions were run at local
after-school clubs with two children at a time to help
them feel at ease, though they worked individually as
we were interested in their personal approaches (see
Fig. 1). Children were provided physical tokens in four
different shapes and colors and a dataset to visualize
(we chose relatable data, one set about pizza
deliveries; one about trains). To motivate the activity,
we told children a story about the data and said it was
to be visualized using the tokens to communicate it to a
younger child. The data was presented in a tabular
form, a format familiar to children of this age. Datasets
included quantitative, binary and categorical attributes.
Once children had finished we asked them to explain
their visualizations.

Methodological Challenges
When designing the above study, we encountered several
methodological challenges. Below we discuss these
challenges, how they manifested themselves in our study
outcomes, and the questions they raise.
Vis Materials. Following the lead of previous constructive
visualization studies [2] we decided to use physical tokens
in our study as these allow the flexible creation of visual
constructs without requiring prior knowledge (in
comparison to current vis tools, that have not been
designed with children in mind) or specific skills (in
comparison to sketching). We also considered playdough

Figure 3: Revisions of the set of
tokens to be used over time.

for its flexibility, but, pilots showed that it encouraged
highly playful behaviors (e.g. “baking” pizzas) leading
away from the visualization activity. When designing a
suitable token set we had to balance the number of colors
and shapes to allow for flexibility while not overwhelming
the children with too many choices. We went through
three iterations (see Fig. 3) and tested different token sets
with a group of adults first and only then with children to
spare them frustrations due to basic usability issues [4].
For flexibility, we provided pencils for children to annotate
their token constructions.
The resulting visualizations were surprisingly detailed and
varied given the limited token set, and span a continuum
of abstract visual representations and data-driven pictorial
constructs (see Fig. 2, 4 & 5). Children rated the handling
of tokens as easy. However, also due to the
tediousness of working with the tokens, some children,
especially those with the more elaborate pictorial
visualizations decided not to represent the entire data
set. Further vis studies with children should investigate
the use of other materials (e.g., lego, pencil & paper,
and playdough) to see how these influence children’s
mapping processes, their engagement and visualization
outcomes.

Figure 4: Pencil markings made
by children ranging from
numerical to pictorial.

Data. W we tried to provide a relatable data topic to
children while still including a variety of attribute types.
However, the data topic may have influenced the
character of children’s visualizations: 5/8 children who
used the pizza dataset created more pictorial
visualizations, compared to 6/14 children using the
train dataset. Children working with the pizza data
often remarked at the similarity of tokens to pizza
toppings, for example, the red circle tokens similarity to
pepperoni toppings. The ease with which children could
find such visual parallels between data and tokens may
have influenced their visual mapping process. The
tabular presentation of the data may also have affected

children’s visual representations. In 5/11 cases, the
more abstract token-based visualizations followed a
table layout (see Fig.4, bottom). Lastly, the data types
influenced the form of children’s token-based
visualizations. All children found creative ways of using
the abstract visuals given by the tokens, e.g., showing
the number of train carriages. However, we found that
children frequently turned toward literary visuals (e.g.
iconic pictures or digits) to represent more abstract
data that is not directly visible in the real world (e.g.
time and speed; see Fig.4. top left).
Three aspects require further investigation: 1) How do
parallels between real-world concepts inherent in the
data and the vis materials influence children’s visual
mappings? 2) How does a (tabular) data presentation
influence children’s constructed visualizations? and 3)
How to guide the visualization of more abstract
attribute types (e.g., temporal data or relations)?
Task. We deliberately chose to provide children an
open-ended task, without specific questions to answer
through their visualization. We wanted to see if they
would come up with their own questions and focus their
visualizations around these. While all children provided
a general overview of the dataset (some included less
data points than others), and could point out min and
max values within their visualization, children did not
think of “slicing and dicing” the data: none of them
juxtaposed attributes to answer specific questions.
Future vis studies with children should investigate how
children’s vis construction differs if given more targeted
tasks, and how we can provide prompts to encourage
children to interrogate the data in more versatile ways.
Environment. It turned out that when running studies
with children, the study environment is crucial. Afterschool clubs encourage free-form and playful activities,
and our child participants were in a playful mindset
when creating their token-based visualizations. They
could also hear and see their peers doing other things

outside which provided some distraction. Running the
same study in a classroom environment may have
influenced children’s exploration of the data and,
ultimately, their construction of the visualizations.
Study tasks should be constructed to fit with the
environment they are presented in, preferably by
working closely with staff members. We are currently
exploring vis activities in more focused classroom
environments, also investigating how to run vis
construction tasks with larger groups of children.
Eliciting Reflections. We ran sessions with two children
at a time to try and create a setup where children
would reflect on their vis construction process through
discussion. However, during activities, few discussions
occurred. While children would readily answer questions
about their design choices and, when asked, explain
their visualizations to each other, it was difficult to get
them to reflect on their visual mapping process.
Indeed, even for adults, it can be difficult to reflect on
internal processes if the task is quite novel. We need to

further investigate methods (e.g., through think aloud)
to initiate discussion and reflection among children
during and after the vis process.

Conclusion
The area of vis for young audiences is still quite young.
We have found constructive vis approaches using
physical tokens to be a promising way to investigating
how children visually map abstract data, potentially
informing the design of visualization tools for children.
The physical tokens allowed children to construct
visualizations with ease while providing room for
creativity. However, on a methodological level we
encountered several challenges mainly regarding the
choice of vis material and data, the nature of the
visualization task, and the study environment. Our
paper is an early reflection on how choices along these
dimensions may change children’s visual mapping and
outcomes. Based on this we hope to stimulate a debate
on how to engage children into visualization activities for research, pedagogical purposes and beyond.

References
1.

Solving Number Problems: A Comparison of Young
Children’s Use of Physical and Virtual Materials.

Huron, S., Carpendale, S., Thudt, A., Tang, A.,
and Mauerer, M. (2014). Constructive

2.

Computers and Education, 54(3), 622–640.

Visualization. Proc. of DIS’14, 433–442.
Huron, S., Jansen, Y., and Carpendale, S. (2014).
Constructing Visual Representations: Investigating

5.

Read, J. C. (2013). CHECk: A Tool to Inform and
Encourage Ethical Practice in Participatory Design
with Children. CHI Work-in-Progress.

the Use of Tangible Tokens. IEEE TVCG, 20 (12),

6.

Uttal, D. H. (2003). On the relation between play

2102 - 2111.
3.
Figure 5: Further visualizations
created by children from highly
abstract(top) to highly pictorial
(bottom)

4.

Lee, S., Kim, S. H., Hung, Y. H., Lam, H., Kang, Y.
A., and Yi, J. S. (2016). How do People Make
Sense of Unfamiliar Visualizations? A Grounded
Model of Novice’s Information Visualization
Sensemaking. IEEE TVCG, 22(1), 499–508.
Manches, A., O’Malley, C., and Benford, S.
(2010). The Role of Physical Representations in

7.

and symbolic thought: The case of mathematics
manipulatives. Contemporary Perspectives in
Early Childhood Education, i, 97–114.
Wun, T., Payne, J., Huron, S., and Carpendale, S.
(2016). Comparing Bar Chart Authoring with
Microsoft Excel and Tangible Tiles, Proc. of
EuroVis, 111 – 120.

