Understanding Physical Activity through
3D Printed Material Artifacts
Rohit Ashok Khot
Exertion Games Lab
RMIT University, Australia
rohit@exertiongameslab.org

Larissa Hjorth
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
larissa.hjorth@rmit.edu.au

ABSTRACT

In this paper, we advocate a novel approach of representing
physical activity in the form of material artifacts. By
designing such material representations, we aim to
understand what these artifacts might offer in terms of
reflecting upon physical activity. For example, what types
of affect do material artifacts, representing ones’ physical
activity create for the user? In order to advance this
understanding, we designed a system called SweatAtoms
that transforms the physical activity data based on heart rate
into 3D printed material artifacts. We conducted an “in the
wild study” by deploying our system in six households
where participants were experiencing five different material
representations of their physical activity for a period of two
weeks each. We found that the material artifacts made
participants more conscious about their involvement in
physical activity and illustrated different levels of
engagement with the artifacts. Along with reporting the
gained insights from the deployments, we offer reflections
on designing material representations for physical activity.
We hope that our work will inspire designers to consider
new possibilities afforded by digital fabrication to support
user’s experience with physical activity by utilizing
interactive technologies at our disposal.
Author Keywords

Physical exercise; personal informatics; quantifiable self;
3D printing; digital fabrication; entertainment
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

Studies have pointed out that a lack of awareness about
physical activity may lead to a sedentary lifestyle [3,36]. In
response, there has been a growing interest in building
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2014, April 26 - May 01 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.

ACM 978-1-4503-2473-1/14/04...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557144

Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller
Exertion Games Lab
RMIT University, Australia
floyd@exertiongameslab.org

technologies that sense and collect personally relevant
information such as bodily responses to physical activity
and provide users with opportunities for self-monitoring
and reflection [25]. For example, devices like heart rate
monitors inform users about their exercise intensity by
measuring the heart rate during a physical activity session
while pedometers count the number of steps taken in a day.
Studies suggest that regular use of these devices can
increase the user’s motivation towards physical activity
[3,25,36]. However, the majority of the existing approaches
mainly target the virtual medium (such as screen-based
output) to provide a portrayal of physical activity
[3,4,8,9,17,19]. On one hand, the virtual medium is
beneficial for data visualization because of its interactive
capabilities (such as allowing for zooming into data) and
support for dynamic updates on the data. On the other hand,
the virtual medium has some limitations as to what can be
experienced with it, as argued by Vande Moere [39] and
Victor [41]. For example, the virtual medium requires a flat
display surface that is less perceivable in daylight and
demands visual attention [40]. The “picture under the glass”
effect [41] caused by a 2D display surface also makes the
virtual medium mainly suitable for 2D representations of
data since onscreen 3D visualization can suffer from
problems such as occlusion, distortion and navigational
issues [35]. Additionally, Ullmer and Ishii [37] worry that
the virtual mode of information entirely focuses on the
visual form and neglects other senses. Ishii [18] reminds us
that “our visual and auditory sense organs are steeped in
the sea of digital information, but other bodies remain
imprisoned in the physical world”. As being physically
active happens in this physical world, we see an opportunity
to explore complimentary design strategies beyond virtual
visualizations to support physical activity.
Recently, with the rapid advancements in digital fabrication
technology, devices like 3D printers are becoming more
accessible for public use. Gershenfeld [11] envisions that
3D printers will soon be found in every home and people
will regularly use them to create, share and copy material
artifacts. As a result, design and HCI researchers are now
increasingly considering the role of digital fabrication in
HCI [28]. This has motivated us to advocate an innovative
approach of representing physical activity data in the form
of material artifacts. By material artifacts we mean physical
objects that are constructed using a digital fabrication
process [30]. By incorporating the digital fabrication

process of 3D printing for constructing material artifacts
based on physical activity, our research also aims to explore
a “physical–digital–physical” mode of interaction, where
physical energy is first invested in generating digital data
such as heart rate, which is then converted back to a
material form, re-entering the physical world. Vande Moere
[39] argues that a material representation carries a meaning
beyond the data itself as it “can be touched, explored,
carried and even possessed” [39], thus potentially
encouraging people to reflect on their behavior yielding
more engaging and educational experiences. Additionally, a
recent study by Jansen et al. [20] compared virtual and
material visualizations of physical data and found that
visualizations of data in material form can be easier to
understand for the user because of the material’s 3D
features. In sum, material representation can offer many
opportunities. However, it remains unclear how to design
such material representations to support physical activity.
In order to contribute to an understanding of material
representations of physical activity, we conducted an “in
the wild” [33] study on our prototypal system
“SweatAtoms” [21,22]. SweatAtoms transforms physical
activity data based on heart rate into five different 3D
printed material artifacts. We deployed SweatAtoms in 6
households to present findings from the system in use.
Although invoking behavioral change was of general
interest to us, we focused primarily on eliciting richer
reflections on physical activity and understanding the affect
material artifacts, representing one’s physical activity, can
have on users. Through the deployments, this research
contributes the following: 1) Insights gained from the
design and deployment of the SweatAtoms systems in
households that illustrate various affects of material
representations
on
individual’s
physical
activity
experiences. 2) An initial understanding of the
interrelationship between material representations and
physical activity.
RELATED WORK

Li et al. [25] argued that visualization plays an important
role in motivating users towards physical activity because it
helps users to reflect upon their performance and to gain
insights into their physical activity levels. However, Vande
Moere [39] points out that physical activity data such as
heart rate is often very abstract in nature, and “has no
natural counterpart that can be graphically reproduced.”
Therefore, it becomes the designer’s responsibility to create
meaningful mappings of physical activity data for the user.
We next discuss how designers have previously approached
this issue.
Visualization using numbers and graphs

Most of the commercial applications built around sensing
technologies such as heart rate monitors use numbers and
graphs to show data from recent and past physical activities

of users on screens1. Numbers and graphs take little screen
space and can be easy to interpret, however there can be
usability and interpretation issues when it comes to large
data sets [16].
Visualization using virtual metaphors

Lin et al. [26] and Consolvo et al. [4] built systems in which
physical activity is represented using virtual metaphors
such as a virtual fish and garden flowers respectively. The
designers believe that virtual metaphors can be more
engaging, motivating and easy to glance at when compared
to graphs and numbers. Moreover, the authors believe that
such virtual metaphors can develop empathy in users
motivating them to exercise more. However, living
metaphors can sometimes discourage participants from
doing the desired activity: for example, in the fish-based
metaphor, people did not want to look at the fish when they
were inactive because they knew their sedentary activity
would make the fish sad [26].
Visualization using interactive art displays

Fan et al. [8] utilized a variety of abstract virtual
visualization patterns to display the number of steps users
have taken in a day. Their study revealed that people found
abstract visualizations engaging. Some artists have also
explored the use of physical activity data for artistic and
musical performances [7]. George Khut [23] explored an
interactive abstract visualization of heartbeat data while the
Interactive Institute [17] created a Brainball game
controlled by player’s brain waves.
Visualization using physical metaphors

Similar to virtual metaphors, people have also looked at
physical metaphors to make people aware of their sedentary
lifestyle and prompt them to be physically active. For
example, Breakaway is a sculpture-based metaphor system
by Jafarinaimi et al. [19], where the sculpture starts to yawn
if the user remains seated for a long time.
Visualization using playful systems

Prior work has also attempted to facilitate play experiences
around the sensed bodily responses of physical activity. For
example, Run Zombie Run [34] is a mobile app that
prompts users to jog using a game-based narrative while
Berkovsky et al. [2] have looked at virtual game rewards in
exchange of physical activity, which suggests that rewards
can be an important design consideration when building
systems to support physical activity.
Rethinking visualization of physical activity

The above mentioned relevant literature suggests an
emphasis on using a virtual medium to represent physical
activity whereas non-virtual (material) representations have
not been explored much, possibly because of the scarcity of
1

E.g.: http://runkeeper.com, http://fitbit.com

resources that could support material visualizations.
However, with the recent advancements in 3D printing
technology, we see an opportunity to explore material
representations of physical activity as an alternate design
strategy. We believe the way energy is spent (subtracted)
during physical activity is reversely analogous to the way a
3D printer works where a 3D model is constructed by
adding up materials layer by layer on the print bed. This has
motivated us to build a system called SweatAtoms that
utilizes 3D printing to represent physical activity.
SWEATATOMS

SweatAtoms is a 3D modeling and printing system that
transforms physical activity data into 3D printed material
form (Figure 1). We utilize the constructive solid geometry
technique [5] and preprogrammed patterns to generate 3D
designs. These models are then printed, using a 3D printer,
forming an aesthetic and informative expression of physical
activity data in material form. Next, we discuss our design
process to determine the material representations for our
study.

Figure 1: The SweatAtoms system in action: 1) User performs
a physical activity 2) Her heart rate is measured 3) A 3D
model is created based on the heart rate pattern 4) User prints
the 3D model 5) User engages with the printed artifact 6)
Engagement with the artifact affects her current (and possibly
future) physical activity experience.
Design process: Mapping heart rate to 3D design

Our design process involved investigation into the design
space surrounding material representation, digital
fabrication (3D printing) and physical activity. To help us
explore each of these design spaces, we held regular
meetings with available experts in each of the abovementioned areas. For example, we had lengthy discussions
with two junior level interaction designers (1 male and 1
female) and three senior contemporary artists (1 male and 2
female) on possible representation choices. We also talked
to an expert (1 male), working on 3D printing from last two
years, to identify current limitations and possibilities of
state-of-the-art 3D printers. Finally, we also spoke to three
designers of exertion games (3 male, 1 senior and 2 junior)
as well as two physical activity trainers (2 male) to identify
the aspects of physical activity that should be highlighted in
a material form. Below we summarize the key aspects of
each design space that we identified after the discussions.

Aspects of physical activity

We chose heart rate data as a first exploration to represent
physical activity as the physical activity trainers suggested
to us that heart rate data is commonly used to analyze
physical activity performance and progress towards a set
health goal [1]. We discussed with them the finer details of
heart rate data such as six heart rate zones (resting,
recovery, aerobic, anaerobic, speed and alarming) [1], and
got an insight on how these zones can be utilized to convey
varied information related to physical activity: for example,
the resting heart rate is a good indicator of a user’s physical
inactivity (sedentary lifestyle). Exertion game designers
also recommended us to look at the frequent changes in the
heart rate data to uncover interesting patterns and insights
on physical activity routine.
Aspects of material representations

We decided on the following design strategies suggested by
Consolvo et al. [4] for creating material representations that
could facilitate richer reflections on physical activity:
•

Abstract and reflective: The material representation
should not only reflect certain aspects of physical
activity but should also be aesthetically pleasing.

•

Public: Users should be able to wear the artifact or
keep them on display in their home. However, care
should be taken to conceal any personal information
that a user might not want to share in the public space.

•

Unique: Each artifact should appear unique and
differentiable from the rest of the artifacts.

•

Positive: The material artifact should be a positive
reinforcement for doing physical activity.

Aspects of digital fabrication

After having a discussion with the digital fabrication
practitioner, we gained an understanding of the limitations
and capabilities of the current 3D printers. For example, we
realized that the current printers are not capable of printing
complex shapes, which limited our possible representation
choices. Additionally, we also considered the printing time
(which increases with the complexity and density of a
selected shape) as well as the sustainability of the material
(environmentally friendly). As a result, we chose to print
small shapes using a biodegradable material called
Polylactic acid (PLA) and selected the Cube 3D printer [6]
for fabrication because of its polished look and its interface
which we found easy to use.
Taking the above discussed aspects into account and after
many design iterations and fabrication trials, we decided on
five material representations of physical activity. The
technical details and descriptions of the representations are
provided in Table 1 and Figure 2 respectively. Below we
briefly describe each of the representations.

Representation 1: Graph

“Graph” is an “abstract and reflective” representation where
each recorded heartbeat per minute is mapped to a point in
XY space. The plotted points are then extruded to achieve a
suitable thickness for 3D printing. The idea behind this
representation was to mimic a virtual graph and to offer
detailed information on heart rate in a material form.
Representation 2: Flower

“Flower” is an “abstract and unique” representation where
unlike the “graph” representation; we only capture
significant changes (±20 beats per minute) to the heart rate
and then represent them in a floral pattern. The length of the
petal increases with the heart rate while the width of the
petal captures the duration of that heart rate intensity. We
intend it to serve as a wearable jewelry item that captures
the variations in heart rate through a floral pattern and
signifies how heartbeats have evolved over a day.

Table 1: Summary of the selected five designs

Representation

Max. dimensions
(l × w × h) (mm)

Avg. print
time (mins)

Graph

120 × 80 × 4

20

Flower

40 × 40 × 4

25

Frog

20 × 20 × 20

30

Die

16 ×16 × 16

35

Ring

20 × 20 × 4

10

SWEATATOMS IN ACTION: IN THE WILD STUDY

We conducted an “in the wild” study [38] to understand the
impact of material artifacts on the behavior and experience
of an individual engaged in everyday physical activity.
Given the exploratory nature of our design work, we
focused on gathering a rich set of opinions rather than a
majority of opinion. As such, our work leans on the idea of
cultural probing [9] and “in the wild” [33] studies that aim
to encourage reflective thinking about a system.
Recruitment

Figure 2: Five material representations of physical activity,
each depicting a different aspect of physical activity.

We deployed the system in 6 households across a large
metropolitan city for a period of 2 weeks. We recruited
participants using the snowball method. We had one
participant from every home except for the one where a
couple (Frank and Kate as changed names) was interested
to participate together in our study, which we welcomed.
There were 4 male and 3 female participants with their age
varying from 26 to 52 years (average 34). The sample size
of 7 participants is in-line with the previous studies on
cultural probing [9,10,13,15]. We asked the participants
about their level of physical activity in a week (low 1-2
days, medium 3-4 days, high more than 4 days) and also
about their most common physical activities (see table 2).

Representation 3: Frog

“Frog” is an “abstract and positive” representation, which
serves as a playful reward for doing physical activity. The
size of the frog is scaled based on the amount of physical
activity done in a day.

Table 2: Demographic details of the participants.

Name
(changed)
& Age
(years)

Occupation

Level of
physical
activity

Common
physical
activities

“Die” is an “abstract and reflective” representation where
six faces of the die depict the amount of time spent in each
of the six zones of heartbeat data. We intend the die model
to serve as a playful object that can also be stacked together
to support comparison between physical activities on
different days.

Alicia (52)

Manager

Medium

Jogging, cycling

Alan (30)

Engineer

High

Gym training

Kelly (43)

Architect

Medium

Tennis, cycling

Frank (29)

Student

Medium

Karate, cycling

Representation 5: Ring

Kate (27)

Student

High

Yoga, cycling

Chad (32)

Consultant

Low

Gym training

Dave (26)

Teacher

Low

Cycling,
walking

Representation 4: Die

“Ring” is a “reflective and public” representation where the
circles around the ring denote the number of active hours in
a day. We define an active hour as an hour where the heart
rate is above the resting zone. The diameter of the circle
increases with increase in the heart rate and the ring is
designed to be a wearable item.

Setup

We supplied each participant with a heart rate monitor
(Polar H7) [32], an iPod Touch (5th generation) with the
installed Polar Beat application and a Cube 3D printer with
2-3 PLA plastic filament tubes as printing material. The
heart rate monitor was paired up with the iPod using the
Bluetooth low energy protocol. Following the cultural
probing practice, we also provided diaries and asked
participants to reflect upon their experience on our system.
Procedure

We installed the SweatAtoms system and 3D printer in
every household. Then, we introduced the participants to
the system, study procedure and how to understand each
artifact. As our intention was to make the printer a part of
the home, we placed the printer according to the
participants’ wishes (which we noted). We also went
through the process of printing one object to make
participants familiar with the printing process. We then
interviewed participants about their daily routines in terms
of physical activity. For quick reference, we provided every
participant with an A3 poster detailing the study steps to be
followed.
Tasks in the morning

maintain a daily diary. We visited each household two
times (first and last day) and spent around 4-5 hours with
each participant. Based on the participants’ needs (such as
difficulty in running the 3D printer), we visited some of
them more frequently. Additionally, we were in contact
with everyone through emails and phone calls. In the
conversations, we focused on how they used the
SweatAtoms system and gathered their thoughts and
experiences with it. We also took notes and recorded audio,
which was then coded and analyzed for common themes.
FINDINGS

Deployment of material artifacts representing physical
activity not only led us to identify new insights and
opportunities but also raised some questions. We describe
below our key findings from the deployment of the system.
Intervention

Participants welcomed the system and the study setup in
their home with excitement.
Accommodating the 3D printer

Participants usually placed the 3D printer in their living
room space close to a window to nullify potential print
smell, as seen in Figure 3.

We asked the participants to wear the heart rate monitor and
start the Polar beat application on the provided iPod while
starting their day (usually around 7-8 am). Participants were
then asked to continue any usual routine including any
physical exercise throughout the study’s duration.
Tasks in the evening

We asked the participants to stop the Polar Beat application
and to take off the heart rate monitor in the evening (usually
around 5-7 pm). Once the heart rate monitoring was
stopped, the recorded data was sent automatically to our
SweatAtoms application. The SweatAtoms application then
generated five material representations in the StereoLithography (STL) format from the received heart rate data.
We then converted the generated STL files into the required
print file formats (.cube) and emailed them to the
participants. (due to the taxing nature of the study, we did
the conversions for the participants). To print the material
representations, participants were required to copy these
files on a USB stick and print them one by one by attaching
the USB stick to the 3D printer. This process could have
been simplified by wirelessly accessing the 3D printer;
however, it would have required modifying the participants’
personal Wi-Fi settings, which we chose not to interfere
with. The printing time varied for every object based on the
participants’ level of physical activity (and thus the object
size) every day, but typically it took around 90-120 minutes
for printing all five objects.
Data source

To gain insights into the underlying motives and
experiences of the participants, we asked the participants to

Figure 3: Participants tried to make the printer fit into their
home ambience.

Alan, being a technologically oriented person, kept the
printer along with his other tech gadgets in a separate room.
Kate was particularly happy with the size of the printer as it
fitted into an empty window space. Frank and Kelly said
that they would not have liked a bigger printer than this.
Interestingly, Kelly felt the printer being a part of her
household. For example, as the printer was kept near to an
open window, she tried to conceal its appearance from the
outside with cardboard to prevent someone stealing it. The
printer worked smoothly for the entire study duration in all
households except one. At Alan’s house, we had to
recalibrate the print offset and replace the print filament.
There were no complaints about the printer smell; however,
Frank and Kate commented that the printing noise is
affecting their concentration when studying. As a result,
they moved their study activity to a different room while
the printing was taking place.

Accommodating the artifacts

Frank bought one box to keep all his objects together while
Kelly utilized the envelopes of promotional campaigns to
keep objects sorted according to each day. We found it
noteworthy that a participant went out of his way and
bought a box, as we had not previously seen such
commitment in some of our prior work with participants.
Lessons learned

The size of the 3D printer is the key to finding an
appropriate place in a household. Designers should also
consider printer noise, as it could be an issue.
Engagement with the process

All the participants were enthusiastic about seeing their
heart rate reflected in material artifacts despite the lengthy
process of printing all five objects every day (Figure 4).

objects delivered to him in a mailbox rather than doing the
printing at home daily. Kelly and Chad also pitched a same
idea. Alan on the other hand got excited about 3D printing
and tried to learn more about the printer’s capabilities and
current trends in 3D printing. All participants enjoyed the
opportunity of changing colors of the plastic filament and
wished to have more colors in order to print everyday
artifacts in different colors. Participants were also satisfied
with the size of the artifacts. However, Kelly wanted to
print a bigger “Flower” so that she can rest her wine glasses
on them.
Four participants, however, did not like the idea of printing
objects every day; rather, they wanted to make printing
more flexible. For example, Chad added: “I should be able
to choose when and what data I can print”, while Frank and
Kate inquired: “Can we print an object representing heart
rate from both of us?”
Lessons learned

Figure 4: Participants were enthusiastic to see how their
reflected heart rate evolved in different material forms as the
study progressed. Participants arranged their objects
according to day and used sticky notes for assigning days.
Engaging with the heart rate monitoring

Participants felt that heart rate was an appropriate measure
of representing their physical activity. Five participants
were curious to see how their physical activity was
reflected in the artifacts at the end of day, while the
remaining two participants tried to confirm whether the
artifacts correctly portrayed their physical activity. Two
participants had previous experiences of wearing a heart
rate monitor but they never wore it continuously for 8
hours. Four participants felt a little uncomfortable in
wearing the heart rate monitor continuously for 8 hours
every day and they wished to have a strapless heart rate
monitor instead. Three participants did not like the idea of
continuous monitoring and suggested us to track heart rate
only during an exercise.
Engaging with the 3D printing process

Most participants printed artifacts every night before going
to bed, two participants skipped printing on a couple of
days and then did bulk printing on the weekend to cover the
backlog. All participants were excited initially to see the
printing process, however, their interest in watching the
print process faded over time. Frank mentioned, “in the
beginning, it was exciting to see objects printing small, big,
like a recap of my physical activity... later it became time
consuming.” He further added that he would prefer to have

Designers should allow participants to customize their
experience by letting them choose when and what
information needs to be printed. Additionally, there might
be an opportunity for designers to combine physical activity
data from multiple people and represent them in one object.
Similarly, designers should look into utilizing strapless
heart rate monitors for a study.
Engaging with the artifacts

The “Frog” was the favorite artifact, as all participants got
affectionate with it immediately. Participants particularly
adored the idea that the frog gets bigger if they exercise
more. Kelly felt “it is like burning your body fats and
putting them on the frog”. The majority of the participants
kept frogs stacked on top of their computer screens and near
their working desks (Figure 5). Frank and Kate competed
against each other by doing more exercise in order to get a
bigger frog. Kate read from her diary (while holding the
printed frogs from her and her husband’s data): “see, how
little I am doing in comparison to my husband L”. Alan,
being a very active person, liked the “Graph” artifact as it
clearly displays his performance during various physical
activities. He particularly enjoyed the frequent high and low
peaks in the artifacts showing how dynamic his day was.
Chad stacked the graphs from all days next to each other,
which was helpful for him to monitor his progress.
Interestingly, Frank and Kate had different views about the
“Graph”: Kate mentioned “the graph is not very exciting as
we can see the same on a virtual screen. It would be like
printing something that we have already seen. I don’t like
that.” Four participants found the “Flower” artifact
aesthetically pleasing and mentioned various ways of using
them in their everyday life: Alicia felt that she could wear
them as earrings; Dave, on the other hand, was interested in
a flower garden and stacked all flower artifacts next to each
other on a desk. The “Ring” artifact was less appreciated as
participants felt it does not convey much meaning to them.

Moreover, participants also questioned its utility. Dave
replied, “One has only 10 fingers, then how many rings can
he wear?” Three participants found the “Die” informative
as it made them realize about their sedentary lifestyle. Kate
was particularly unaware about the time she spends sitting
each day and was glad that we included the “Die” artifact in
the study communicating this information to her.

such artifacts, if she keeps on printing them each day. Frank
and Chad had a common suggestion of making them all
interlock with each other to create a bigger sculpture. Kelly
put forward the idea of Lego bricks to construct a
skyscraper of physical activity over time while Dave
suggested printing of the objects only on selective or
special days rather than everyday. Three participants
wished for a provision to recycle the artifacts.
Conversations around artifacts

Figure 5: Participants liked the frog and the way it scales with
their physical activity. It also became the object for public
display and reflective conversations.
Cherishing artifacts

Participants had several ideas of using the printed artifacts
in the future. Dave, for example, created a clock using all
his printed artifacts as shown in Figure 6. He plans to hang
it on the wall of his study room. Kate who liked the
“Flower” model described: “I would fill a glass bowl with
water and then put candles on the printed flower and let it
float on the water surface, it would make a great decoration
for my house.” Chad had a great physical workout session
on one day of the study. Looking at the printed artifacts of
that day, he happily said: “I am going to cherish today’s
graph...see how dynamic it is...I would put it on my shelf to
remind me that I did well.” It was heartening to see that
participants took interest in correlating and arranging the
objects together.

Figure 6: Dave created a wall clock using his printed objects to
remind him about how his heart rate evolved over time.

Most participants were happy with the selected design
choices for representing their physical activity, however,
Kelly, Alicia and Dave were also willing to design their
own objects.
Four participants raised issues of sustainability and
pondered over the utility of objects in their life. For
example, Kelly asked what would she do with so many of

Many participants showed their printed artifacts to
neighbors and visitors to their home. These artifacts
generated a sense of curiosity and conversations among the
visitors who did not know what the design actually meant.
Participants were enthusiastic to explain the meaning to
them. Kate on weekends does voluntary work for young
girls at a school. At an annual science and technology
event, which happened during the first week of the study,
she enthusiastically spoke about the system to the girls. She
plans to give some artifacts to the girls “as a token of her
heart”. Chad similarly gave a few of his artifacts to his
mom and sister who came to visit him one day during the
study. Alicia is planning to incorporate the system in her IT
services office. She says: “I would like to use an approach
like this for a reward and recognition program that we are
starting. We were thinking about giving out big stars but
that is lame in comparison with letting them print out 3d
trinkets and the more they need to be rewarded the bigger
they are - plus the more they can print.”
Lessons learned

Although people’s interest in the printing process faded
over time, their interest in the artifacts appeared to be more
persistent over time. Designers can learn from the “Frog”
design and should map a similar reward structure into their
design. For example, the participants welcomed scaling the
size of an artifact as a reward to the invested efforts in
physical activity. Participants took interest in decorating
their homes with the artifacts, and these artifacts also
became a topic of conversion. The “Frog” also prompted
healthy competition among participants for getting bigger
frog. These narratives suggest that personalized artifacts if
designed carefully, have an ability to extend engagement
with physical activity. For example, although participants
appreciated the aesthetics of artifacts, their utility as well as
sustainability was equally important to participants.
Relating to physical activity

Most participants became more conscious about their
physical activity routines and started to take their heart rate
data more seriously with time. Alan said: “I used to see my
heart rate data on my mobile, but this is different, now I can
not only touch and feel my data, but I can also show it to
the world, I care more about my heart rate now.” Alicia
confirmed, “My trainer was so happy to see my progress,
thanks for letting me participate.” This supports findings
from previous research where participants gained awareness

about themselves from a visualization method [21]. Besides
physical activity, participants also tried to understand their
daily routines from the printed material artifacts. Frank
said: “It was great to know about the self and my activities
throughout the day from the printed artifact (graph): when
I went to university, when I came back (by looking at large
peaks in the graph), when I sat idle (by looking at lower
peaks)”. However, Frank and Alicia initially had difficulties
in interpreting the “Flower”. Alicia thought Flower is like
clock that shows her physical activity of the entire day
around the clock. Referring to a large petal in Flower, she
said, “see I was most active around 2 pm, when I had to
rush twice to office for work.” After discovering that Flower
is not clocklike timely representation of physical activity,
she felt slightly disappointed and suggested to make such
alternations to Flower design. Kelly and Chad expressed the
need of designing artifacts that are easier to interpret similar
to the “Graph” and “Frog” artifacts.
Although we did not target an immediate behavioral change
with the artifacts among the participants, there was
anecdotal evidence of increased physical activity amongst
them. For example, Alicia confirmed her increased physical
activity to us in an email (Figure 7). She added, “but the
main thing is I am out on my bike and am aware of my
heart. In the past, if I exercised on Saturday I would have
said that I deserve to rest on Sunday :)” Dave resumed his
weight training after a long time to see its reflection on the
artifacts. He mentioned: “It’s been ages since I did that […]
but now this study prompted me to start weight training
again”. We find these examples illustrative of people’s
rekindled interest in physical activity. Kelly emphasized
that “it’s the Frog, that makes me jog more”, while Frank
and Kate said that they did more physical activity to get a
bigger frog at the end of the day.

they contain their personal data and are printed by them at
home. Referring to the “Flower” and “Graph” artifacts,
Kate mentioned, “this is me and my data, you cannot get
this in the market.”
Lessons learnt

3D printing was new for all the participants, although all of
them had heard about it. We worked with the vision that in
10 years time, most people will have a 3D printer in their
home just like a 2D printer today, and therefore, we intend
to explore the future interactions associated with today’s
technology. Although further studies are needed to
eliminate any doubts about novelty effects, our interview
data suggests that participants’ interest in the printing
process faded over time; however, participants’ interest in
the artifacts appeared to have persisted over time.
Participants mentioned that the objects matter to them
because they reflect their personal data and activities,
making them unique, as they cannot be “bought at a shop”,
as mentioned by Kate. Furthermore, the statement made by
three participants that they would rather get the objects
delivered to them in the mail rather than printing them at
home (to avoid the printing noise), further suggests that the
participants were able to differentiate between the appeal of
3D printing and personalized 3D artifacts. Therefore, we
argue that giving a physical form to the ephemeral
experience of physical activity can facilitate a deeper
engagement with the data. Secondly, personalized material
rewards also prompted physical activity amongst people
who otherwise was spending time sedentary.
DISCUSSION

We discuss below the experiences that the material
representations of physical activity elicited for our
participants.
Material artifacts as an autotopography

Figure 7: Engagement with the artifacts encouraged a
participant to go for a walk.
Significance of personalized material artifacts

During the follow-up interviews, we asked the participants
what difference a material artifact made over the virtual
counterpart. Most participants answered affirmatively that
the physical form and the support for sensory capabilities
like touch and feel makes the material artifacts more special
than the virtual ones. Kate added that “[on a mobile phone]
you look at your heart rate and then forget about it, here
[addressing the material artifact] you cannot, it is more
persistent”.
During the follow-up interviews, participants also
mentioned that they care more about these artifacts because

Miller [29] argued that individuals like to express
themselves with material artifacts that embody their lives,
personalities, emotions and achievements. Our participants
expressed themselves by placing the “Frogs” on their
computer monitors and decorating their home with
“Flowers”. Such an arrangement of material artifacts as
physical signs to spatially represent the identity of an
individual is called “autotopography” [14]. This
autotopographical collection of material artifacts put on
display not only becomes the public representation of the
self and craftsmanship [12] but also serves as a memory
landscape to the owner triggering reminiscence [38]. As
such, our study supports the theory of autotopography.
Interestingly, the autotopography was driven mainly by the
aesthetic rather than the embodied information in the
artifacts. For example, the “Frog” was readily displayed in
the home ambience despite containing very little and
abstract information about an individual’s activity; in
contrast, other more informative models like “Graph” and
“Die” did not become a part of people’s home ambience

except for Chad, he placed his “Graph” on the living room
wall for public display to cherish his best workout day.
Designers therefore should consider building artifacts that
are easy to interpret, although the embodied information
can be as little as “I did more physical activity”.
Material artifacts as personalized rewards

According to the Goal Setting Theory [27], incentives are
important to sustain a user’s interest in an activity.
Participants liked getting artifacts at the end of the day as a
reward and a testimony to their invested physical efforts. It
seemed that material rewards could contribute to an
increase in physical activity for some participants.
Participants enjoyed how the “Frog” scaled based on their
physical activity and they did more physical activity to get a
bigger “Frog”. Participants appreciated this scaling, even
though a bigger “Frog” required more printing time. We
believe that the perceived value of the artifact among the
participants also increased with the time they waited for it
to get printed. Therefore, in future works, it could be
interesting to examine the relationship between printing
time and size of the reward.
Previous research on archiving and souvenirs suggests that
material artifacts can be cherished more than virtual objects
because of their higher visibility in the surroundings and
low replication possibilities [13,24]. Our findings support
this argument, as participants liked the fact that these
artifacts are unique and cannot be purchased elsewhere.
Additionally, they also liked that these artifacts embodied
their personal heart rate data. As a result, we see further
opportunities for using material artifacts as personalized
rewards to physical activity that can readily be displayed
and consider it an interesting design space for designers to
explore in the future.
Material artifacts for reflection and reminiscence

Participants mentioned that the material artifacts prompted
reflection and reminiscence on past physical activities.
Sometimes participants encountered difficulties in
understanding the meaning conveyed by these artifacts (the
“Flower” in particular). These issues however encouraged
conversations and fuelled recall about past activities. We
believe that ambiguity in meaning encourages participants
to expand their interpretation of physical activity data and
thus could facilitate a richer reflection about the self and
past activities [15].
Material artifacts have a tendency to disappear into the
background, which Miller calls as the “humility of things”
[29]. For example, unlike a virtual representation that calls
for instant user attention, a material artifact can sit quietly
in the surroundings and may not seek attention. We believe
this property can be harnessed as an alternative design
strategy to provide passive tracking of physical activity and
to encourage delayed feedback on data. For example,
material artifacts can be built that passively monitor user’s
physical activity and which are seen only when the user is

looking for them. We see an opportunity for designers by
engaging with these notions to provide users with additional
opportunities for reflection on their physical activity.
CONCLUSION

The contribution of this work is the first conceptual
understanding of the relationship between material
representations and physical activity. With the deployment
of our system SweatAtoms through an “in the wild” study,
we explored how participants’ relationship to physical
activity can be affected through design. We hope that our
work inspires different ways of reflecting upon embodiment
and material representations, especially, in the context of
physical activity and sensing technology. We also
encourage design researchers to consider and incorporate
digital fabrication in their HCI design practice: in
particular, designers should consider not only trying to print
things that already exist in the material world, but rather
consider that there is an opportunity to print things from
data that exists only in the digital world, such as heart rate.
We also foresee an opportunity of having personal 3D
printers at home, as these printers can produce unique
material artifacts that are never as good as coming from
large fabrication houses, but are more personal
representations of one’s life. In the future, we envision
people crafting their world with moments from their lives,
using data that was previously only seen in digital form but
now re-entering their physical world in an embodied
material form.
REFERENCES

1. Benson, R., and Connolly, D. Heart rate training,
Human Kinetics, 2011.
2. Berkovsky, S., Coombe, M., Freyne, J., Bhandari, D.,
and Baghaei, N. Physical activity motivating games:
virtual rewards for real activity. In Proc. CHI’10, ACM
(2010), 243-252.
3. Bravata, M.S., Smith-Spangler, C., Sundaram, V.,
Gienger, A.L., Lin, N., Lewis, R., Stave, C.D., Olkin, I.
and Sirard, J. Using Pedometers to Increase Physical
Activity and Improve Health: A Systematic Review.
JAMA, 298(19), 2007, 2296-2304.
4. Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W. and Landay, J. Theorydriven design strategies for technologies that support
behavior change in everyday life. In Proc. CHI’09,
ACM (2009), 405-414.
5. Constructive solid geometry
http://evanw.github.io/csg.js/, 2013.
6. Cube 3D printer. http:// cubify.com/cube/index.aspx.
7. Donnarumma, M. http://marcodonnarumma.com.
8. Fan, C., Forlizzi, J. and Dey, A. A Spark Of Activity:
Exploring Information Art As Visualization For
Physical Activity. In Proc. Ubicomp ’10, ACM (2010),
81-84.

9. Gaver, W.W., Dunne, A., and Pacenti, E. Cultural
Probes. Interactions, 1999, 21-29.
10. Gaver, W. W., Bowers, J., Boehner, K., Boucher, A.,
Cameron, D., Hauenstein, M., Jarvis, N., and
Pennington, S. Indoor weather stations: investigating a
ludic approach to environmental HCI through batch
prototyping. In Proc. CHI '13, ACM (2013), 3451-3460.
11. Gershenfeld, N. Fab: The Coming Revolution on Your
Desktop–from Personal Computers to Personal
Fabrication. Basic Books, 2007.
12. Goffman, E. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life,
Penguin Books, 1959.
13. Golsteijn, C., Hoven, E. van den, Frohlich, D. and
Sellen, A. Towards a More Cherishable Digital Object.
In Proc. DIS'12, ACM (2012), 655-664.
14. Gonzalez, J. A. Autotopographies. In Prosthetic
Territories. Politics and Hypertechnologies, Westview
Press, 1995, 133–150.
15. Hallnäs, L. and Redström, J. Slow Technology;
Designing for Reflection. Journal of Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing, Springer-Verlag, 2001, 201-212.
16. Herman, I., Melancon, G., and Marshall, S. M. Graph
visualization and navigation in information
visualization: A survey. IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput.
Graph. 6, 10, 2000, 1–21.
17. Hjelm, S.I., Browall, C., Brainball-using brain activity
for cool competition. In Proc. NordiCHI’00, (2000).
18. Ishii, H. Tangible bits: beyond pixels. In Proc. TEI’08,
ACM (2008), xv-xxv.
19. Jafarinaimi, N., Forlizzi, J., Hurst, A. and Zimmerman,
J. Breakaway: an ambient display designed to change
human behavior, In Proc. CHI EA’05, ACM (2005),
1945-1948.
20. Jansen, Y., Dragicevic, P. and Fekete, J.D. Evaluating
the Efficiency of Physical Visualizations. In Proc. CHI
'13, ACM (2013), 2593-2602.
21. Khot, R. Sweat-atoms: crafting physical objects with
everyday exercise. In Proc. CHI EA '13, ACM (2013),
2701-2706.
22. Khot, R., and Mueller, F. Sweat-atoms: turning physical
exercise into physical objects. In Proc. CHI EA '13,
ACM (2013), 3075-3078.
23. Khut, P.G. Development and Evaluation of Participantcentred Biofeedback Artworks, unpublished thesis
manuscript, University of Western Sydney, 2006.
24. Kirk, D.S. and Sellen, A. On human remains: Values
and practice in the home archiving of cherished objects.
ACM TOCHI 17, 3, 2001,1-43.

25. Li, I., Dey, A. and Forlizzi, J. Understanding my data,
myself: supporting self-reflection with ubicomp
technologies. In Proc. UbiComp '11, ACM (2011), 405414.
26. Lin, J. L., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G. and
Strub, H.B. Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging physical activity
with an interactive computer game. In Proc.
Ubicomp’06, Springer (2006), 261-278.
27. Locke, E., and Latham, G. A theory of goal setting and
task performance, Prentice Hall, 1990.
28. Mellis, D., Follmer, S., Hartmann, B., Buechley, L. and
Gross, M.D. FAB at CHI: digital fabrication tools,
design, and community. In Proc. CHI EA '13. ACM
(2013), 3307-3310.
29. Miller, D. The comfort of things. Polity, 2008.
30. Mota, C. The rise of personal fabrication. In Proc. C&C
'11, ACM (2011), 279-288.
31. Munson, S.A., and Consolvo, S. Exploring Goalsetting, Rewards, Self-monitoring, and Sharing to
Motivate Physical Activity, In Proc. Pervasive Health
2012, 25-32.
32. Polar heart rate monitors,
http://www.polar.com/en/products.
33. Rogers, Y. Interaction Design Gone Wild: Striving for
Wild Theory. Interactions 18, 4, 2011, 58-62.
34. Run Zombie Run, https://www.zombiesrungame.com/.
35. Shneiderman, B. Why not make interfaces better than 3d
reality? IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 23, 6, 2003.
36. Tudor-Locke, C., Bassett, B.R., and Swartz, A.M. A
preliminary study of one year of pedometer selfmonitoring. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 28, 2004,
158-162.
37. Ullmer, B., and Ishii, H. Emerging frameworks for
tangible user interfaces. IBM systems journal 39, 3.4
(2000), 915-931.
38. Van den Hoven, E. 2004, Graspable Cues for Everyday
Recollecting. PhD thesis, Technische Universiteit
Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
39. Vande Moere, A. Beyond the tyranny of the pixel:
Exploring the physicality of information visualization.
In Proc. IV’08, IEEE (2008), 469-474.
40. Vande Moere, A. and Patel, S. Analyzing the design
approaches of physical data sculptures in a design
education context. In Proc. VINCI’09, 2009, 1-23.
41. Victor, B. A brief rant on the future of interaction
design,
http://worrydream.com/ABriefRantOnTheFutureOfInter
actionDesign/, 2013.

