Citation: Verweij, David, Kirk, David, Rogage, Kay and Durrant, Abigail (2019) Domestic
Widgets: Leveraging Household Creativity in Co-Creating Data Physicalisations. In: RTD
2019 - Fourth Biennial Research Through Design Conference: Method & Critique: Frictions
and Shifts in RTD, 19th - 22nd March 2019, Delft & Rotterdam, Netherlands.
URL:
https://figshare.com/articles/Domestic_widgets_Lev...
<https://figshare.com/articles/Domestic_widgets_Leveraging_household_creativity_in_cocreating_data_physicalisations/7855778/1>
This
version
was
downloaded
http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/38735/

from

Northumbria

Research

Link:

Northumbria University has developed Northumbria Research Link (NRL) to enable users to
access the University’s research output. Copyright © and moral rights for items on NRL are
retained by the individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners. Single copies of full items
can be reproduced, displayed or performed, and given to third parties in any format or
medium for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior
permission or charge, provided the authors, title and full bibliographic details are given, as
well as a hyperlink and/or URL to the original metadata page. The content must not be
changed in any way. Full items must not be sold commercially in any format or medium
without formal permission of the copyright holder. The full policy is available online:
http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/policies.html

This document may differ from the final, published version of the research and has been
made available online in accordance with publisher policies. To read and/or cite from the
published version of the research, please visit the publisher’s website (a subscription may be
required.)

Domestic Widgets:
Leveraging Household
Creativity in Co-Creating Data
Physicalisations
David Verweij1, David Kirk1, Kay
Rogage1 and Abigail Durrant1
Northumbria University,
Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom
{david.verweij, david.kirk,
k.rogage, abigail.durrant}
@ northumbria.ac.uk
1

Keywords: Internet of Things;
Co-Creation; Physical
Visualizations; Research Toolkit;
Family; Research through Design

Abstract: The home environment is a complex design
space, especially when it has multiple inhabitants. As
such, the home presents challenges for the design of
smart products. Householders may be different ages
and have differing interests, needs, and attitudes
towards technology. We pursued a research-throughdesign study with family households to envision
and ‘co-create’ the future of data-enabled artifacts
for their homes. We have iteratively developed
domestic research artefacts for these households
that are open, data-enabled, physical visualisations.
These artefacts - called Domestic Widgets - are
customisable in their design and functionality
throughout their lifespan. The development process
highlights design challenges for sustained co-creation
and the leveraging of household creativity in (cocreation) research toolkits. These include the need
to allow and inspire iterative customization, the
need to accommodate changing roles within the
home ecology, and the aim that such design should
be inclusive for all family members (irrespective of
age and technical proficiency), whilst maintaining
a role and purpose in the home. We invite the RTD
community to critically discuss our, and other,
open and iterative end-user designs for sustained
co-creation. By presenting unbuilt and interactive
pre-built Domestic Widgets, we interactively foster
engagement with practises of sustained co-creation.

1

Frictions and Shifts in RTD
#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

2

3 Widgets: Leveraging Household Creativity in Co-Creating Data
Verweij, Kirk, Rogage, Durrant | Domestic
Physicalisations

Research Context

Frictions and Shifts in RTD

Programmable hardware and software allows us to build and experiment with computation in many professional and leisure activities.
Developments in programmable hardware are often argued for
because “current prototyping tools for electronics and programming
are mostly targeted to engineering, robotics and technical audiences”
(Barragán, 2004, p. 3). Efforts in exploring prototyping solutions have
led to innumerable prototyping boards (e.g., Arduino, Raspberry PI)
and programming languages. This has influenced manufacturing
processes and product development processes; and these solutions
are increasingly integrated into education to teach ‘21st-century
skills’, such as creativity, critical thinking and digital literacy.
The growth in supply and demand of these (commercially available)
programming and hardware kits further incentivised the rise of the
‘expert amateur’ (Kuznetsov and Paulos, 2010), for whom participating
in Do-It-Yourself (DIY) practises is not solely motivated by utility.
An expanding demographic of users are being empowered to use
electronics for - amongst other things - pleasure, utility and expressiveness (Tanenbaum et al., 2013). Here, the responsibilities of
implementation that have traditionally been held by designers,
programmers and developers increasingly shifts towards the user.
In return, more design effort is focused on supportive infrastructure
and standardised tools, materials and manufacturing processes.
These should provide the user with a high flexibility in customisation
and allow for user-led appropriation.
Empowering people to be creative is also a common goal in partici­
patory research, including participatory design, co-creation and
end-user development (EUD). Research-through-Design (RtD)
approaches to co-creation, such as workshop formats, provide a
collaborative context for engaging and supporting participants in
creative practises with interactive technologies (e.g. sensors and
actuators), enabling them to address potential obstacles in techno­
logy literacy or perceived creativity.

Many consumer market toolkits
also aim to address these perceived obstacles by making
hardware and software more
accessible. Such toolkits are
often used in educational settings and target younger users.
Modular toolkits allow quick and
easy tinkering with pre-made
modules, either through physically connected modules such as
LittleBits (https://littlebits.com/,
last visited September 27, 2018),
or wirelessly connected modules
with flow- or block-based programming software such as
SamLabs (https://uk.samlabs.
com/, last visited September 27,
2018). Both of these toolkits
lower the barriers to the creative
exploration of electronics and
coding, compared to platforms
such as Arduino (https://www.
arduino.cc/, last visited September 27, 2018) or Raspberry PI
(https://www.raspberrypi.org/,
last visited September 27, 2018).
Platforms such as these often
increase the difficulty in coding
and using hardware, yet generally have a lower price point. This
introduces a conflict between
module-based toolkits that are
priced higher than the typical
costs for DIY projects (Kuznetsov
and Paulos, 2010), with more
affordable hardware platforms
that require better programming
and electronic skills. This
remains a challenge for future
consumer DIY hardware and
software toolkits to lower both
barriers.
A number of specially designed
toolkits and systems have been
developed by researchers in the
participatory tradition, to ex<Figure 2. An example of an
assembled Domestic Widget. At
this stage, the design of the
moving visualisation is merely a
‘blank’ disc, and must be finished
in order to visualise and give
meaning to any chosen connected
data. Each Widget is powered
over USB, either through a USB
charger or Power Bank. The latter
provides more mobility, yet
requires occasional maintenance.
Photo by authors

#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

4

plore the future of smart homes and the Internet of Things (IoT). For
example, the Loaded Dice (Lefeuvre et al., 2017) supports the exploration of coupling inputs and outputs with pre-made computational
dice, for design ideation with IoT. The RtD approach with Loaded Dice
removes the need for end-user (software or hardware) development.
Instead, it focuses on experimenting with actual and sensorial experiences in co-creative settings. With developments in customisable,
appropriable and deployable toolkits and products, EUD research
further aims to learn from the reflective development process of
(professional) end-users - in-situ – that scaffolds in-depth research in
context, such as on the subject of connectivity in (smart) homes.
Tailored towards Tangible and Embodied Interfaces (TEI), Tetteroo
and colleagues (Tetteroo et al., 2013) elaborate on five key challenges
to achieve this aim, including, but not limited to, supporting end-users
in designing interactivity, and integrating the virtual with the physical.
Conducting participatory research in households strengthens these
challenges, particularly as obstacles cannot always be mediated by
human facilitators. Whilst the consumer market toolkits provide
support for these to some extent, we still see a group of users not
being involved in the DIY of ‘smart’ artefacts. This group might
include householders who are demotivated by technical thresholds,
or those who are just not that interested.
Whilst IoT is a new technological paradigm, hacking, making and
similar familiar DIY practises at home have been around for many
decades. One particular activity that is relatable to householders is
tinkering and crafting with household materials. This activity is
accessible to most, and performed by the younger ages both at home
and at school. With such a continuous interest in this, and other types
of household crafts (Kuznetsov and Paulos, 2010), we set out to
develop a research toolkit to involve younger users in co-creating the
future of IoT for smart homes. We iteratively designed a discoverydriven toolkit design that focuses on crafting with household materials
- arguably the Research Product (Odom et al., 2016) of our research
inquiry. The next chapter will present the design of the toolkit, after
which we discuss considerations that arose during the development
process. These include the prior mentioned challenges for EUD
designs, and additional considerations for equivalent future DIY
data-enabled toolkits.

a.

b.

Domestic Widgets

Domestic Widgets are made from pre-perforated and pre-cut cardboard (Figure 1), with a flat-pack punch out and foldable enclosure
accompanied by: a pre-programmed microcontroller (Wemos D1
Mini); a 2-meter thin and flexible USB cable; a popular 180-degree
micro servo motor (SG90 or SG92R); a USB charger; and a rubber
band or two. The components are basic enough in functionality to
allow anyone to assemble a Domestic Widget (see Fig. 1 - 4). A Domestic Widget will move anything attached to its servo motor based on a
configured data source, effectively acting as a data physicalisation
(Jansen et al., 2015). These Widgets, upon providing power and an
initial setup using a smartphone or laptop, are connected to the
internet over Wi-Fi and ready to be configured using a smart speaker
such as the Google Home (Mini), see Figure 6. In order to give meaning to
any configured connectivity, the design requires additional form
development by its end-users. Figure 5 demonstrates a subset of
possibilities for how a Widget could be used and appropriated. The
‘unfinished’ Widget is symmetrically designed, resulting in a wedgelike form factor that can be positioned in multiple ways.

5

Figure 3a, b. Holes in
the triangles allow for
(microcontroller) heat and
(servo motor) sound dissipation,
and offer additional ways of
attachment - for example for
hooks, wires and threads. The USB
cable is horizontally entered
through the middle-back, such
that an orientation is not
suggested (contrasting when
the cable would be attached to
the bottom-back). Upon folding
and closing a Widget, the
cable will (automatically) be
twisted vertically. This this
prevents the components from
being pulled out, and thereby
eliminates the need for a fixture
to hold the microcontroller. The
microcontroller thereby lays
loose within the enclosure.
Photos by authors

Frictions and Shifts in RTD
Figure 4. An environmentally
friendly cardboard flat-pack
toolkit design requires minimal
tools and steps to assemble.
Protruding triangular supports
stick such that the assembly
can be proceeded slowly and
one step at a time. Solely the
servo-arm assembly requires
an adhesive, everything else
remains detachable. All
materials and components (top)
can be acquired for less than
$11, - for a single Widget.

Figure 5. Examples of appropriation
(by the authors) to demonstrate
different possibilities of positioning
and orientation. Whilst the
circular cardboard servo-assembly
flexibly allows for manipulation and
attachment, further exploration should
increase adaptability to increase
the amount of possible uses.

Photo by authors

#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

Photo by authors

6

7

Frictions and Shifts in RTD

The seemingly aimless servomotor attachment provides
means for extension through
adhesives and fasteners, yet does
so without a clear intended
end-result. Similarly, the
non-decorated ‘dull’ cardboard
prevents being suggestive about
its positioning, which is why no
printed cardboard (boxes) were
recycled as construction material.
In sum, the toolkit provides easy
and accessible means to start
making structurally sound
personal physicalisations. It does
so whilst being provided with
minimal information about its
intended use, so that this can be
purposefully left open to interpretation by its users (Gaver et
al., 2003). The toolkit thereby
empowers families to tinker,
craft and explore data-enabled
artefacts with accessible mate­
rials and tools. This allows us,
researchers, to investigate
families’ experiences of designing and developing equivalent
connected systems.

Data Physicalisations

In the era of increasingly connected everyday things, technology
can promise people more control
over how the things they own
work together at home. But
equally, these things are gaining
more agency. In addition, more
sources of data and intelligence
are becoming available for
everyday use - but, what benefits
does this offer? The Domestic
Widget design focuses on how we
Figure 6. Example excerpt from
a speech interaction with the
Domestic Widgets conversation
agent via the Google (Home)
Assistant. Based on a predefined
set of action possibilities by
us, Google’s machine-learning
powered speech-to-text algorithm
acts upon the user’s input. It
can thereby autonomously ask for
additional input (e.g. ‘where
should Jane track the data?’),
or forward the users intent
to our custom cloud software.
Each widget is required to be
given a human name, so that
both the system and users can
refer to them via speech.

would integrate these developments in our family households, and
how they would influence our routines and utility of these sources. To
probe collaboration and discussion, we opted for our toolkit to focus
on physicalisations, i.e. physical data visualisations (Jansen et al.,
2015). Amongst a breadth of output modalities, movement’s expressiveness affects multiple senses and is noticeable for multiple inhabitants at the same time. In light of crafting and DIY practises, physi­
cality through movement further interacts with materials and objects
in a way that visuals, temperature or sounds cannot. As such, we argue
that creating physicalisations is an extremely useful DIY activity for
engaging people in the discussion of digital connectivity in multi-­
person households - and we suggest similar projects could benefit
equally from such an approach.

Speech Interaction at Home

The audibility of speech-based interaction lowers the technical
threshold for programming connected objects. It offers a high level of
discoverability for inhabitants in the near vicinity, supporting legitimate peripheral participation and over the shoulder learning (Lave
and Wenger, 1991). It furthermore democratises interaction (Porcheron et al., 2017), such that anyone is able and allowed to set a Widget’s
functionality. On the technical side, using a speech conversation
agent enables the utilisation of smart speech recognition algorithms
and appropriate prompts based on the users’ inputs, even when the
user input is not understood by the system. This provides an accessible way of programming (for designers and developers alike), whilst
its output is comprehensible to act upon in further software. We
chose speech-based interaction to be accessible and swift in making/
crafting data-enabled artefacts - and argue similar work can further
benefit from exploring voice-based interaction in the home.

Towards Household Creativity

Our design process was inspired by Google’s Paper Signals (https://
papersignals.withgoogle.com/, last visited September 27, 2018), tiny
paper-based data physicalisations for everyone to build themselves.
We saw potential in the functionality and design of this product,
which has a certain aesthetic that, even though it is self-built, remains an aesthetically pleasing (living) object. Furthermore, we build
upon their speech-based interaction implementation, though completely revisited the physical and task design. In our own attempts to
build these Signals, we quickly realised that the required coding,
online authentication and time-consuming complex paper mechanics introduced a substantial threshold for ourselves and various user
groups. These Signals are intended as a step-by-step instruction to
achieve a pre-defined result. We wished to transfer the abilities and
aesthetics of this project onto an open-ended design, with nearly no
step-by-step instructions required. Whilst it is not uncommon to

Image by authors

#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

8

9

prepare or install designs on a
participant-by-participant basis
in RtD research, we additionally
aimed to increase scalability and
minimise researcher contact to
further leave (more) participants
in control.
To avoid influencing the materials
or tools that users might be using
in conjunction with our Toolkit,
we focused our exploration on
less-specialised tools and materials. These include printer
paper, thick cardboard from
boxes, or thinner cardboard from
food supplies such as cereal
boxes. Standard white paper
(80 g/m2) did not offer enough
structural support in creating
simple self-supporting shapes
(which was also the case for the
Paper Signals project), whilst
thicker paper is less likely to be
present in many households.
Thick cardboard is commonly
available in households, but
proved difficult to manipulate.
We settled on thinner cardboard
(~1,5 mm), which can be manipulated and is commonly found in
homes. Experiments with this
material looked aesthetically
pleasing and retained its affordance that it may be cut, folded

Figure 7. Exploration in paper
soon led to the use of cardboard.
These displayed explorations
aimed to establish a structural
holder for the components,
without specialized tools or
templates. Further versions
included an angled design to
allow for externalisation of
the servo assembly, and thereby
varied (weighted) attachments.
Photos by authors

Frictions and Shifts in RTD

Gauging Public
Interest and Feedback
at the Maker Faire

or ripped. With this material, we explored whether it was possible to
make something from scratch. We found designing a structural base
with simple tools extremely difficult. Additionally, the designs that
could stand and hold the components (Figure 7) required detailed
instructions to be easily replicated. This struggle resulted in abandoning the ‘making from scratch’ approach. Templates for end-users
to cut out cardboard were deemed unfit, as they require the end-user
to use specialised tools, such as craft knives or even digital fabrication methods. Our proposition was to design a foldable kit that can
be prepared with specialised tools by us, but does not require these to
be built at home. The resulting design (see Fig. 9) was presented,
discussed and evaluated at the national Maker Faire.
#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

10

Maker Faire

In order to engage with our target group, we presented 20 working
Domestic Widgets to a steady stream of DIY or technology savvy
visitors (see Fig. 8). Using a tablet, visitors were able to configure each
Widget through conversation. A children’s activity (see Fig. 10 and
11b) aimed to encourage younger visitors at our stand to engage with
the idea of connected artefacts. We provoked visitors to discuss the
potential use of these Widgets, to evaluate their perceived usefulness,
to imagine valuable data sources these Widgets could physicalise, and
to gauge which aspects of such a toolkit would be interesting to
families.

11

Figure 8. With an interim version
of the Domestic Widgets we
designed and displayed a stand
at the national Maker Faire of
2018. This event - that focuses
on families with members of all
ages - allowed us to engage with
potential end-users, and evaluate
our design considerations for
this diverse target group.
Photo by authors

b.

a.
Frictions and Shifts in RTD

Our stand piqued visitor interest in different ways (Fig. 8). Some
visitors were eager to learn the inner-workings of a Domestic Widget,
whilst others engaged in the configuration of one or multiple widgets.
The popularity of the children’s activity (Fig. 10 and 11b) further
allowed us to engage them - and their parents - in a discussion on
what a physical visualisation would or should mean for their household. When asked what data these widgets should physicalise (and
when anything is possible), visitors suggested a wide variety of data
sources, both generic data (e.g. the time in Bangkok) and personal
data (e.g. the Wi-Fi bandwidth usage at home) alike. Suggestions
included, but were not limited to, Widget functionality such that it
represents things like the current wind direction, or when the next
train will pass by, or the current room temperature, or the bandwidth
used on the local network or a countdown timer. Suggestions that are
more personally related data sources included, but were not limited
to: a reminder to take some medicine, the emotional state of the cat in
the house, where a family member currently is, or when a certain
fashion item is on sale. In response to ‘where’ the visitors would place
their Widget, suggestions ranged from the living room, to the kitchen,
the office or simply any room.

Figure 9. The interim version
included similar components, yet
differs from the final version in
its form factor. The ‘bottom’
triangle includes a slot for the
microcontroller, its USB cable
enters the enclosure not in the
middle-back, and the enclosure is
non-symmetrical in the vertical
axis. The servo-arm assembly was
made as small as possible, which
resulted in a triangular shape.
Photo by authors

During the event, we were able to discuss connectivity for the home
with most visitors, yet less so with those aged seven years or younger.
At the same time, the children’s activity was enjoyed by all ages. This
demonstrated the value of our crafting and tinkering approach to
inclusively engage all family members of all ages in a discussion on
data enabled artefacts, and led us to further pursue our conceptual
Domestic Widget design.

Further Form Explorations
Figure 10. A ‘mini’ Widget
consisted out of a scaled
down Domestic Widget design,
without the triangles. With
a push-pin an arrow could be
attached, representing the
physicalization of (manual) data.
Photo by authors

The variety of Widget placements is currently covered by their wireless connectivity. The mix of envisioned useful data sources further
reflects reported use of current data connectivity platforms such as
IFTTT (Ur et al., 2016). Even though we successfully implemented a
speech-based configuration of our Widgets, the types of accessible
resources that we could offer users were limited (even in a research
context) - particularly those which do not require authentication or
screen-based input to successfully be configured. This holds especially true for the suggestions that are more related to personal
events or activities. For example, one visitor suggested that pointing
and clicking on a part of a webpage whilst browsing could result in a
Widget tracking that part of the website. If we envision that this and
#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

the other personal data sources become available and possible to
implement, all this information would need to be abstracted in
position or movement for the Widget to be represented. Furthermore,
these sources vary in type of data, such as continuous, relative and
absolute ‘values’. From a developer perspective, we could standardise
these abstractions, and provide fixed abstractions. However, we
identify the opportunity to also involve the households in this abstraction – as they are the users that need to ‘make sense’ of their
chosen preferred data source. These results emphasise the persistent
challenge of including all household members in a collaborative use
and application of data in the home environment.

Reflection upon our interim Widget design (see Fig. 9) led to the
further exploration of form and affordance. Here, we evaluated the
aesthetics of possible form factors, and assessed their practicality/
utility (see Fig 12 and 13). The resulting design (see Fig. 1) includes a
backwards tilt that ensures stability when weighted objects are
attached - something a rectangular box would not. A wider shape
would assist in this stability, but this removes the difference between
positioning a Widget straight up, or on its side, effectively reducing
the possible uses and possibility for appropriation.
The use of faceplates was explored in response to Maker Faire visitors’
questions (i.e. “How would you know what it means?”) and suggestions (see Fig. 13). The interim design implemented arrows, yet their
meaning without a visible mapping was not understood. As the
faceplates allow users to swiftly draw or write a mapping behind the
arrows, this accessory would increase its ease of use. However, the
faceplates equally strongly suggest this particular use case. As we
would like to see the data being externalised in more and different
ways by its users, we removed this accessory from the final version.

12

13

Figure 11 a, b. At the Maker
Faire, we presented our interim
design as 20 working Widgets (a)
and attached a generic arrow
symbol to physicalize connected
data sources. Using an Android
tablet (rather than voice in such
noisy environments) visitors were
able to assign different data
sources to different Widgets.
By using human names (a),
references (or instructions)
to specific Widgets could be
made. An additional children’s
activity (b) consisted out of
folding and decorating a ‘mini’
Widget (see also Figure 10).
This further motivated family
engagement and proved to be of
much interest to the younger
visitors.to the younger visitors.
Photo by authors

Similarly, the servo-arm assembly in the interim version (see
Fig. 9) was not symmetrical.
Changing this to a circle increased the ambiguity in its use,
further supporting our aim to
increase the open-endedness of
the design.

Concluding - Domestic
Widgets for RtD

Persistent goals throughout the
development of the Domestic
Widgets were to keep the number of components low, and to
minimise the specialist tools
required to build the toolkit. Contrasting the required laser-cutter
for preparing the cardboard, the

Frictions and Shifts in RTD

current electrical components are readily available, and require
minimal labour to assemble them into functional Widgets. In addition, with a total cost of less than €seven per Domestic Widget (excluding the USB power adapter), we believe this design is highly
applicable and transferable to other practitioners and researchers.
Through the presentation of Domestic Widgets in this paper, we may
argue that DIY and crafting offers a valuable, co-creative method for
engaging discussions with end-users on future technology and its
role in their lives. The participatory nature of our design might
empower participating families as end-users to work through possible alternative (re-)configurations of data physicalisations at home.
Yet, we seek broader and further explorations of various aspects that
support this endeavour. For example, we still ponder about the
balance between using generic accessible data sources or personal
data sources that require additional (authentication) methods. Further, we wish to discuss the design in form and aesthetics such that it
might motivate creative solutions more effectively. This includes the
technical and mechanical elements (such as the attachments to the
servo motor), but quite importantly it includes a design that sparks
interest and motivates modification at first sight. With this, we will
further improve participants ability to act upon their own creations
(and reflections thereof). In turn, we can observe and study their
reflective practises which can reveal needs and values for future
smart domestic artefacts that might normally be too profound.

Figure 12. Symmetrical, but not with equal
sides. Not too divergent in a particular
axis, to maintain stability regardless of
positioning. A few versions include triangles
that did not protrude the front face, to allow
for additional faceplate(s) to be tightly
fit. However, removes the friction support
(see Figure 4), and introduces asymmetry in
the triangles, both increasing difficulty
in assembly. With asymmetrical servos
(see Figure X) and our focus on symmetry
in result, we designed the front cut-out
to result in a centred servo axel, rather
than a centred opening in the cardboard.

As is, our design elicits challenges and improvable design aspects.
Even more so, we invite the RTD community to engage with us in
discussion utilising craft, craft materials and speech-based interaction to establish sustained co-creation. Our IoT simplification into
data physicalisations opens up re-configurations of their materiality,
and thereby their appropriation and purpose in everyday scenarios.

Photo by authors

Figure 13. In response to
simplify customisation, we
explored the use of various
faceplates for users to write
on, or attach onto. Whilst these
offer more surface and material
to work with, they all suggest
the use of faceplates as gauges
with a moving indicator in front.
We believe more uses are possible
- and potentially useful - we
vacated the faceplate accessory.
Photo by authors

#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

14

15

To critically consider this approach, we engage the RTD
community in hands-on building
and tinkering with our Domestic
Widgets, so that we might explore, evaluate and raise the next
steps in these goals collaboratively. We additionally aim to do
so through disseminating our
work digitally: providing blueprints, tutorials (Desjardins et al.,
2017), and potentially even by
distributing our toolkits to
like-minded researchers. At this
stage of development, we are
particularly interested in how
the Domestic Widgets toolkit can
leverage its material qualities,
such that its material experience
(Giaccardi and Karana, 2015)
benefits families competences
and values on a performative
level to explore connected
artefacts through making.
Figure 14. Through hands-on
building and configuring Domestic
Widgets, we can critically
discuss the toolkits design and
material influence on eliciting
family values in RtD research.
Photo by authors

References
Barragán, H. (2004) Wiring: Prototyping Physical Interaction Design. Master Thesis.
Interaction Design Institute Ivrea. Available from: http://people.interactionivrea.org/h.
barragan/thesis/thesis_low_res.pdf [Accessed: 26 Sept 2018].

Frictions and Shifts in RTD

Desjardins, A., Wakkary, R., Odom, W., Lin, H., Schilling, M.L. (2017) Exploring DIY Tutorials
As a Way to Disseminate Research Through Design. interactions 24, 78–82. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3098319
Gaver, W.W., Beaver, J., Benford, S. (2003) Ambiguity As a Resource for Design. In:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’03. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, pp. 233–240. https://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642653
Giaccardi, E., Karana, E. (2015) Foundations of Materials Experience: An Approach for HCI.
In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’15. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 2447–2456. https://doi.
org/10.1145/2702123.2702337
Jansen, Y., Dragicevic, P., Isenberg, P., Alexander, J., Karnik, A., Kildal, J., Subramanian, S.,
Hornbæk, K. (2015) Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization. In: Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, pp. 3227–3236. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702180
Kuznetsov, S., Paulos, E. (2010) Rise of the Expert Amateur: DIY Projects, Communities,
and Cultures. In: Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction:
Extending Boundaries, NordiCHI ’10. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 295–304. https://doi.
org/10.1145/1868914.1868950
Lave, J., Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
Cambridge University Press.
Lefeuvre, K., Totzauer, S., Bischof, A., Storz, M., Kurze, A., Berger, A. (2017) Loaded Dice:
How to cheat your way to creativity. In: Proceedings of the 3rd Biennial Research Through
Design Conference. Edinburgh, UK. https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.4746976
Odom, W., Wakkary, R., Lim, Y., Desjardins, A., Hengeveld, B., Banks, R. (2016) From
Research Prototype to Research Product. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 2549–2561.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858447
Porcheron, M., Fischer, J.E., Sharples, S. (2017) “Do Animals Have Accents?”: Talking with
Agents in Multi-Party Conversation. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW ’17. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, pp. 207–219. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998298
Tanenbaum, J.G., Williams, A.M., Desjardins, A., Tanenbaum, K. (2013) Democratizing
Technology: Pleasure, Utility and Expressiveness in DIY and Maker Practice. In: Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, pp. 2603–2612. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2481360
Tetteroo, D., Soute, I., Markopoulos, P. (2013) Five Key Challenges in End-user Development
for Tangible and Embodied Interaction. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM on International
Conference on Multimodal Interaction, ICMI ’13. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 247–254.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2522848.2522887
Ur, B., Pak Yong Ho, M., Brawner, S., Lee, J., Mennicken, S., Picard, N., Schulze, D., Littman,
M.L. (2016) Trigger-Action Programming in the Wild: An Analysis of 200,000 IFTTT Recipes.
In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’16.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 3227–3231. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858556

#rtd2019 #researchthroughdesign #delft #rotterdam

16

