This is the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted for publication in the following source:
Rezaeian, Alireza & Donovan, Jared
(2014)
Design of a tangible data visualization. In
Nguyen, Quang Vinh, Wu, Yingcai, Bednarz, Tomasz, & Huang, Tony
(Eds.)
VINCI 2014: Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Visual Information Communication and Interaction, ACM Digital Libraries, Sydney,
Australia, pp. 232-235.
This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/70452/

c Copyright 2014 ACM

Notice: Changes introduced as a result of publishing processes such as
copy-editing and formatting may not be reflected in this document. For a
definitive version of this work, please refer to the published source:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2636240.2636869

Design of a Tangible Data Visualization
Alireza Rezaeian

Jared Donovan

Creative Industries Faculty

Creative Industries Faculty

Queensland University of Technology

Queensland University of Technology

+61 4 3836 7178

+61 7 3138 3135

alireza.rezaeian@student.qut.edu.au

j.donovan@qut.edu.au

ABSTRACT
In this paper we describe the design of DNA Jewellery, which is a
wearable tangible data representation of personal DNA profile
data. An iterative design process was followed to develop a 3D
form-language that could be mapped to standard DNA profile
data, with the aim of retaining readability of data while also
producing an aesthetically pleasing and unique result in the area
of personalized design. The work explores design issues with the
production of data tangibles, contributes to a growing body of
research exploring tangible representations of data and highlights
the importance of approaches that move between technology, art
and design.

containers for data [1]. Our tangible data-visualizations are not
simple geometric forms, but complex shapes whose physical form
is directly derived from an underlying data set.

Design, Experimentation, Human Factors.

This project also seeks to explore issues of personalized items.
Desires for personalization raise many issues for design. Every
person is unique. We have our own ways of looking, behaving,
speaking, acting, thinking, learning, deciding and choosing. The
purpose of this study is not to find the answer why we are
different. Rather, it is to address the need for personalized design
that people exhibit. Every person has a unique taste and chooses
differently. We have our favorite colors and styles, and some
people even choose clothes to reflect their identity. In this respect
freedman makes a valuable point about data visualization, which
is that it doesn’t need “...to be boring to be functional or
extremely sophisticated to look beautiful" [2]. In other words it is
possible to create data visualizations to be both beautiful and
functional. This project sets out to create a visualization of
personal (DNA profiling) data that is both aesthetically pleasing
and readable by the user.

Keywords

2. RELATED WORK

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces
Interfaces – Interaction styles.

and

Presentation]:

User

General Terms

Tangible data, Personalised items, 3D printing.

1. INTRODUCTION
The increased availability of 3D printing opens up new
possibilities for expanding visual display of data to also make use
of tactile qualities and three-dimensional form as carriers of
meaning in data visualisations [5]. Producing tangible datavisualisations as physical forms seems promising in several
respects. Being able to hold and rotate physical objects could
allow people to easily see the data from different angles and build
a bodily understanding of the shape of the data, and making use of
the tactile surface qualities of a physical form could support the
layering of multiple dimensions of data and better enable people
to get a ‘feel’ for the data [3].
In contrast to data-visualization approaches that make use of 3D
computer rendered graphics presented through the use of displays
[4], this work explores the possibilities of 3D-printed tangible
objects that can be directly held and handled (or even worn).
Although these objects are ‘tangible’ things, our approach should
be distinguished from research into Tangible User Interfaces
(TUIs), firstly because the work presented here is not interactive
and secondly because whereas TUIs often provide for the display
and manipulation of data, this is typically through the use of
simple geometric forms as interactive ‘phicons’ which act as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
VINCI 2014, August 5-8, 2014, Sydney, Australia.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2765-7… $10.00.

There is a growing body of research exploring tangible
representations of data to which our work contributes. Measuring
Cup is a data form project by Mitchel Whitelaw that presents 150
years of Sydney temperature data in a cup-shaped object about 6
cm high [6]. The Weather Bracelet is another project by Mitchel
Whitelaw in which he created a wearable data object, based on
365 days of Canberra weather data using 3D printing.
Several companies have already begun offering personalised
products based on DNA profile data. Dutch DNA provides custom
made forms of jewelry or furniture based on DNA profiling
information1. DNA11 is another website that creates portraits and
personalized art canvases based on a person's DNA profile2.
The increasing availability of DNA analysis and profiling services
combined with the possibility for personalisation of product
production through technologies such as 3D printing raise many
issues for design. The purpose of this study is to explore how
issues of personalization play out in relation to data of a
particularly personal kind – DNA profile data

3. DESIGN APPROACH
We initiated the design process using DNA profile data to
generate the first design. We improved the design over multiple
cycles that included interpreting data, editing the design, creating
the digital 3D model, preparing the model for 3D printing and
1

http://www.dutchdna.nl/dutch-dna/

2

http://www.dna11.com/about-us

actual production. At the end of each step we analyzed the results
based on the goal to create a personalized wearable object,
maintaining the balance between data readability and aesthetics of
the design.
Our key questions for the design were:
•

What are the design considerations for tangible data
visualization in this project.

•

How to design a personalized item e.g. bracelet or ring
based on DNA profiling data as an example for personal
data in this project.
Figure 1: Mapping of DNA test result data

4. DESIGN OF THE FORM
For the purposes of this study, we worked with one of the authors’
own DNA profiling data obtained through an online DNA
identification service based on the PowerPlex® 16 System.
Humans have 23 chromosomes and each of these chromosomes
has a long and a short arm. The test results we obtained for the
DNA provided a listing of significant DNA markers within the
sample. Using information from the UCSC Genome
Bioinformatics website3, we identified which chromosome and
which arm on the chromosome (short or long) each of the markers
in our test results belonged to (Table 1).

This mapping was then used as the basis for generating a 3D
model of the data by angling the left and right arms up and
wrapping them around to form a circular structure that could be
worn as a bracelet or ring and create the iconic shape of DNA
helix (Figure 2).

Table 1: Actual DNA profiling data in PowerPlex® 16 System
rearranged and added chromosome column
Chromosome

STR Locus

Alleles Called

2p

TPOX

3p

D3S1358

17

4q

FGA

22

5q

CSF1PO

5q

D5S818

7q

D7S820

8q

D8S1179

11p

TH01

8

11

10

12
11
8

11

12
6

12p

vWA

13q
15q

D13S317
Penta E

16

17

16q

D18S539

9

11

18q

D18S51

13

14

21q

D21S11

28

30

21q

Penta D

10

11

Xp,Yp

Amelogenin

13
11

Male (XY)

With this information, we developed a visual mapping shown in
(Figure 1). In this figure the blue squares indicate the 23
chromosomes counting from top to bottom. The white circles
indicate the position of the result for each marker on either the
short (left side) or long (right side) arms of the chromosome. The
white squares are counting units to indicate how far along the arm
the marker’s result is situated. Finally, the centre line shifts either
left or right as it goes from top to bottom depending on whether
each marker is on the long or short arm of its chromosome.
3

http://genome.ucsc.edu/

Figure 2: Mapping wrapped into circular form

4.1 Design of Tactile Elements
To facilitate readability of the data in a final 3D printed form, it
was necessary to find an alternative to the colour-coding used in
the above diagrams. The 3D printing technology that we used
supports only single material such as plastic, ceramic or silver and
since we wanted to engage more tactile sense rather than visual
we developed a surface texturing system to distinguish our design
units visually and tactilely. (Figure 3) shows a test print of a range
of candidate textures that were tested as part of an iterative
process of designing this surface texturing. It was important
throughout the design process to create physical models of the
design, because details of tactile and visual feel are impossible to
judge from 3D renderings alone. For example, in the test printing
shown in (Figure 3), many of the surface details that were clearly

delineated in the computer rendering became indistinct in the
physical object.

either a left or right-facing arm (4.2, 4.3). Finally, for the result
units, we applied a frame with a hollow centre to make it stand out
both visually and tactilely (4.4).
One issue with wrapping the arms into a circular form (Figure 2)
is that some of the longer arms may cross over each other. In one
respect, this crossing-over is desirable because it makes the
overall form stronger and more wearable, but for the readability of
the individual units, it could cause ambiguities and conflicts in the
surface texturing system described above. We dealt with this in
the visualisation by combining textures where markers crossed
over. This is shown in the bottom row of Figure 4, which shows
(from left to right) two counting units crossing (4.5), counting
units and result units crossing (4.6, 4.7) and two result units
crossing (4.8).

4.2 Final Printing of Jewellery
After creating suitable textures we combined all the elements into
a final tangible design. Even though we had settled on the final
form for the piece, there were still several iterations of test prints
required to find a final form that would reliably print and was
strong enough to actually be worn. Initially, we printed braceletsized pieces as shown in (Figure 5).

Figure 3: Texture study digital 3D vs. actual print
From this and other test printings of different textures, we
developed a system for distinguishing between centre units,
counting units along the arm of the chromosome and result units,
which would translate well into a printed form (Figure 4).

Figure 5: 3D printed bracelet of DNA profile data

Figure 4: Textures of individual units (top)
and combined (bottom)
For the centre units, we kept a smoother texture so that the units
would join together into the centre line (4.1). For the counting
units, we found that diagonal lines across each unit worked well
because they served as a visual and tactile guide along the arm of
the chromosome. The direction of the diagonal could also indicate

Once we were satisfied with the form of the bracelet-sized pieces,
we produced a ring-sized piece in silver, which is shown in
(Figure 6). There were less tangible texture details in silver
version due to small size of the ring and limitation to produce
such details in small scale but we produced the silver version to
fulfill the need of personalized item and take the project beyond
prototyping and get as close as possible to actual production.
An aspect we found attractive about the final form is that although
the data is not immediately obvious, it can still be deciphered.
Thus the form requires some level of engagement from the

wearer. The form also manages to be evocative of DNA without
relying on obvious visual clichés such as a double helix.

Figure 6: Final 3D print of DNA Ring in silver

5. DISCUSSION
This project has allowed us to explore some of the issues involved
in the design of tangible data visualisations. We adopted an
iterative process in this project, where each iteration included
design, creation and reflection that helped us to move our design
towards the final result.
They were 4 equally important elements in this project:
I.

Creating an actual physical item (production)

II.

Aesthetics of designing item (design & aesthetic)

III.

Visualizing data and keeping it easy enough to read
(data readability)

IV.

Creating a personalized item (personalization)

If we wanted to put more effort on either one of these elements,
we should have sacrificed the other. For example adding details in
order to improve the aesthetic value would likely make it more
difficult for the user to read the data and perhaps more difficult or
impossible to produce. Similarly if we wanted to concentrate on
data visualization and keep it so simple and straightforward it
would likely lack some aesthetic qualities.

One important lesson from the design process was the importance
of moving between digital and physical materials of design
throughout the process.
Further work remains to be done in terms of producing more
designs for other people and seeing how they relate to and
imagine them. To see how people might perceive their differences
through their bracelets to figure out if these items reflect any of
our characteristics (at least biologically). For instance, perhaps
there are those who have the same length on their 3rd arm of their
bracelets; they have some similarity; because they have these
similarities on their DNA. Or even if this is not really possible
from such a simple profile data it would still be interesting to see
if people perceive their DNA to be similar to others or how this
leads them to reflect on their DNA in relation to others.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Fishkin, K. P. (2004) A taxonomy for and analysis of
tangible interfaces. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
8(5), 347–358. doi:10.1007/s00779-004-0297-4
[2] Friedman, V. (2008) Data Visualization and Infographics |
Smashing Magazine. Accessed April 20, 2013.
http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2008/01/14/mondayinspiration-data- visualization-and-infographics/
[3] Moere, A. (2008) Beyond the tyranny of the pixel: Exploring
the physicality of information visualization. In Proc. IV’08,
IEEE
[4] Shneiderman, B. (2003) Why Not Make Interfaces Better
Than 3D Reality? IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 23(6), 12–15.
doi:10.1109/MCG.2003.1242376
[5] Tanenbaum, J. G., Williams, A. M., Desjardins, A., and
Tanenbaum, K. (2013) Democratizing technology: pleasure,
utility and expressiveness in DIY and maker practice. In
Proc. CHI 2013, ACM
[6] Whitelaw, M. (2009) ‘Measuring Cup’, Inside Out, Object
Gallery, Sydney, June 2010.

