A Constructive Classroom Exercise for Teaching InfoVis
Wesley Willett∗

Samuel Huron†

University of Calgary

Télécom ParisTech,
Université Paris Saclay,
CNRS i3 (UMR 9217)

Figure 1: Example data visualizations constructed using tiles (left), LEGO bricks (center), and modeling clay (right).

A BSTRACT
At the beginning of a visualization course, it can be challenging to
provide simple, practical exercises that allow students to explore the
benefits and constraints of different visual mappings. We present an
interactive teaching exercise, adapted from the VizKit visualization
workshop, that can help illustrate and encourage critical thinking
about basic visualization concepts. In this paper we present the
unique pedagogical goals and practical challenges associated with
using construction exercises in an undergraduate course. We further describe how we modified VizKit for use in a classroom setting, introducing new exercises and construction materials. Finally
we reflect on the observations gathered during an initial in-class
deployment with 28 students.
Index Terms: K.6.1 [Management of Computing and Information
Systems]: Project and People Management—Life Cycle; K.7.m
[The Computing Profession]: Miscellaneous—Ethics
1

I NTRODUCTION

This submission describes a set of physical construction exercises
designed to support teaching in an introductory information visualization course.
When creating hands-on exercises for teaching visualization, instructors can leverage a wide range of authoring tools. Students can
author visualizations using visualization templates [2] in software
like Excel, specify charts interactively using graphical tools like
Tableau, and code visualizations using toolkits like D3 [6]. Alternatively, instructors can use low-fidelity exercises like visualization
sketching [7] to help students explore data and consider possible
visualization designs.
However, each of these approaches have shortcomings that can
make them difficult to use as a tool for teaching basic visualization concepts. Visualization templates and editors can be limiting,
since they do not allow students to create new expressive designs
∗ e-mail:

wj@wjwillett.net

† e-mail:samuel.huron@cybunk.com

or explore novel visual mappings [8]. Coding, while much more
expressive, is often too slow and requires a high level of initial programming skill. Hand-sketching, on the other hand, is accessible to
a wide variety of students. Yet even sketching can be intimidating
to those who are not comfortable sketching with pen and paper, and
the resulting sketches can be difficult to update or refine once they
have been created.
Alternatively, manually constructing visualizations out of tangible materials [3] has been shown to be an engaging and expressive
way of introducing visualization to novices [5]. This kind of physical construction can also make it possible for non-experts to quickly
create, update, and refine new visualization designs [4]. Moreover,
construction exercises that use a small set of primitive elements can
encourage the builder to actively and consciously compare possible encodings and visual mappings [8]. These findings suggest that
active physical construction could be a fruitful way of introducing
and reinforcing core visualization concepts in an classroom setting.
In this paper we discuss a set of teaching exercises that we developed for undergraduate teaching in InfoVis. We describe a set
of construction and evaluation tasks which emphasize comparison,
critique, and discussion of visualization concepts, and which can
be run in the constraints of a visualization classroom or lab setting.
We also discuss several alternative construction materials, including
LEGO bricks and modeling clay, which can lower the cost of running the experiment and support alternative visualization designs.
2

V IZ K IT

Building off of previous research on constructive visualization, the
VizKit1 workshop kit was designed as a simple way to improve
data literacy by engaging non-expert participants. The VizKit setup
can be run as a two hour workshop, with hands-on construction
exercises that introduce participants to basic data visualization concepts. While useful, VizKit was not designed with the constraints
and pedagogical goals of an academic course in mind. As a result,
we developed an alternative version of the VizKit procedure for use
in introductory visualization courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
1 https://github.com/INRIA/VizKit

3

G OALS

AND CHALLENGES

Whereas the original VizKit exercises are intended to introduce
newcomers to visualization concepts, the pedagogical goals in a
classroom setting are somewhat different. Here, students may already have some familiarity with basic visualization and computing
concepts. Instead, the pedagogical goals include:
• Helping students internalize the process of data mapping and
visualization construction through rapid, iterative design of
multiple different visualizations.
• Exposing students to multiple different visual encodings of
the same data and encouraging reflections on the practical
tradeoffs between them.
• Introducing students to basic visualization self-evaluation,
peer-evaluation, and critique.
• Encouraging higher-level critical thinking about the process
of visualization design and construction.
From an instructor perspective, the exercise is also an opportunity
to engage students in the course and help establish a fun, creative,
and open learning atmosphere.
3.1

Classroom Challenges

Running the exercise in a classroom setting also introduces a number of practical constraints. Setup time needs to be minimal, and
the length of the overall exercise needs to fit within the schedule
of a typical university course (often with sessions less than 1 hour
long). Ideally, the exercise should also scale well to course sizes
larger than the 20 facilitated by the original VizKit workshops.
4

D ESIGN

OF THE

ACTIVITY

Whereas the workshop version of VizKit is intended to introduce
participants to basic visualization concepts like visual variables and
encoding, we designed the classroom version to build upon and cement student’s understanding of those concepts (which had already
been introduced in lectures).
4.1

Procedure

To fit within a variety of course schedules, we also broke the exercise into a set of four discrete phases that can be completed across
multiple class periods:
Construction (30 mins): Each student team starts with construction materials and a unique dataset. Teams explore their dataset
by constructing as many different visualizations as they can in the
allotted time. Students document each visualization using their mobile phones.
Self-evaluation (10 mins): Based on their visualizations, teams
attempt to answer a set of pre-defined questions about their dataset.
Communication (20 mins): Teams reflect on their self-assessment
and initial designs and construct and annotate a final visualization
to communicate their dataset to others.
Peer evaluation (25 mins): Teams take turns examining others’
datasets and attempt to answer the same set of questions.
4.2

Equipment

In order to deploy quickly in a classroom setting, we created prepackaged versions of the construction materials, data sheets, and
other miscellaneous equipment that student teams could easily unpack at the beginning of class and repack when finished.
In addition to the construction materials, we also provided each
group with printed data sheets and large sheets of butcher paper to
work on top of, as well as pens and sticky notes for annotating their
visualizations. We also gave each group a 1 × 1000 piece of balsa
wood to help align and measure their materials.

4.2.1

Construction Materials

While developing the classroom version of VizKit, we considered
three construction materials with different material properties:
Tiles. Previous versions of the VizKit workshop had used physical tiles modeled after
Froebel Gifts [1]. These tiles are simple, easyto-manipulate primitives that can be composed together to create a wide variety of visual forms. Early studies of constructive visualization [4, 3, 8] have also used these tiles to
good effect.
However, tiles suggest one particular set of operations and construction models. They are discrete, rather than continuous, and
their square edges encourage stacking and rectilinear alignment
over other possible arrangements. Tiles can also be somewhat
expensive to purchase (approximately US$45 per kit). Although
teaching kits can be readily assembled by using freely-available
VizKit patterns and a laser cutter, a large number of instructors still
do not have access to these tools or cannot afford the time necessary
to produce new kits.
LEGO Bricks. These ubiquitous building
blocks offer simple primitives similar in shape
to the tiles, with many of the same physical affordances. 2 × 2 × 1 LEGO bricks are slightly
narrower than the Froebel tiles, but several
times thicker, and are similarly easy to manipulate by hand. While still discrete and rectilinear, LEGO bricks more readily suggest vertical construction than tiles do. Because bricks are physically interlocking, connected groups of blocks are also easier to reposition
and manipulate than groups of tiles. Interlocking bricks can also be
used to create a variety of 3D physical shapes.
Compared to tiles, bricks are relatively cheap and can be readily
purchased new or used in a variety of colors. By assembling a mix
of used and new bricks from an online brick marketplace (BrickLink), we were able to build 288-brick kits in the same 8 colors (36
bricks/color) as the original tiles for approximately US$15/kit.
Modeling Clay. While tiles and bricks encourage construction and encoding in discrete
units, a continuous medium like clay supports
a variety of new operations. Using modeling
clay, participants can visualize non-discrete
quantities, blend colors, and build curvilinear, three-dimensional visualizations. Modeling clay is also considerably cheaper than either tiles or LEGO. By
purchasing bulk modeling clay from a hobby shop, we were able to
assemble kits with similar colors and quantities of material to the
tile kits for approximately US$5/kit.
5

D EPLOYMENT

We tested the exercise in Winter 2016 with 28 students in a 3rd4th year undergraduate Introduction to Information Visualization
course at the University of Calgary. The exercise spanned a lecture
and a tutorial session on the Friday at the end of the first week of the
course. Earlier in the week, students attended two 45-minute introductory lectures. The first lecture provided a broad overview of the
field of visualization, while the second introduced basic visualization concepts including visual variables and their relative perceptual
effectiveness for different data types.
Due to time constraints, we split the exercise into two course
sessions: (1) An initial 45-minute session held during the course’s
regular morning lecture period included the construction and selfevaluation phases. (2) A 110-minute session held during a lab
period two hours later included the communication and peerevaluation phases. Students disassembled their visualizations at

the end of the first session and constructed their final version from
scratched based on their digital photos, reflections, and notes.
We grouped students into 13 teams of 2 (with two late-arriving
students added to existing groups a few minutes into the exercise
creating two teams of 3) and asked teams to remain together across
the two sessions. Five teams used tiles, four used LEGO, and four
used modeling clay.
The teaching team guided transitions between phases and provided feedback and consultation throughout. The instructor and
teaching assistant checked in with teams periodically throughout
the construction and communication sessions to answer questions
and encouraged continued thinking and iteration. The team also
conducted a 15-minute debrief session with the class following the
peer evaluation to elicit students’ feedback on the exercise.
5.1

Observations

Our initial deployment included a relatively small number of participants and a single trial of the exercise. Only 4 or 5 groups used
each building material, making it difficult to draw strong quantitative conclusions about their relative effectiveness at this early stage.
However, initial results and qualitative observations suggest that the
exercise was quite positive.
Because we developed and ran the exercise as part of the course,
rather than as a laboratory experiment, we did not request ethics
approval or student permission to publish data about their results
or describe specific student designs. Instead, we report higher-level
outcomes and takeaways based on our experience as instructors.
All example photos are recreations build by the authors, rather than
student work.
5.1.1

Designs and Iteration

The original VizKit workshop focused on introducing the construction process and allowed considerable time for participants to familiarize themselves with the notion of visual encoding. In contrast, in our in-class deployment, students had already seen several
lectures on visual encoding. As a result, students were able to spend
considerably more time iterating and exploring design alternatives.
Whereas most groups in the VizKit workshops produced only a single visualization, groups in the in-class version were able to produce a much larger number. During the 30-minute construction
period, most of the groups created and recorded at least 5 distinct
visualizations, and one group created as many as 8.
5.1.2

Peer Feedback and Opportunities for Reflection

As noted previously, we deployed the construction activity as a
follow-up to a pair of introductory lectures on encoding and visual
perception. As a result, students were able to use the exercise to
actively test and compare the effectiveness of multiple alternative
visualization designs and encodings. Moreover, we observed that
in the peer-evaluation phase, students were able to provide feedback that referenced and was grounded in the language of visual
variables and perceptual effectiveness/expressiveness.
5.1.3

Material Choice

In general, we observed that students authored creative and effective visualizations with all three construction materials.
Clay was clearly more difficult to work with than either tiles
or bricks, but also produced some of the most creative designs.
Students used clay to create unique symbols, lines, spheres, gradients, and other constructs not possible with discrete building materials. However, construction using clay was much slower, and
most groups produced fewer designs than counterparts who used
tiles or bricks. As with sketching, students performance with clay
also seemed more strongly correlated with their proficiency with the
medium. Students with less artistic skill and less experience with

clay struggled more to create simple visualizations than groups using tiles or bricks did.
We had initially been concerned that the physical affordances
of LEGO bricks would too strongly suggest vertical stacking and
predispose students to create a reduced set of designs. However,
this did not seem to be the case. Students produced a variety of
flat and clustered visualizations using LEGO, and also connected
bricks to build new 3D shapes and other structures (as in Figure 1),
rather than just vertical bars.
At the end of the sessions, a majority of the students listed the
material that their group had been assigned as the most useful of the
three. However, overall the number of students who listed LEGO
as the most useful was notably higher than either tiles or clay.
6 TAKEAWAYS
Students were enthusiastic and engaged throughout the exercise.
In their mid-semester course feedback roughly 5 weeks later, several students mentioned the exercise as one of the highlights of the
course and noted that it helped set the tone for the class. Based on
this feedback, we intend to use the exercise again in future courses
and encourage other instructors to consider using it was well.
6.1 Timing and Structure
Breaking the exercise across two course sessions worked well in
our case, and provided opportunities for students to reflect upon and
refine their designs in the second session with feedback from peers
and the teaching team. However, we benefited from a course schedule that placed both a 45 minute lecture and 110 minute tutorial on
the same day, with only a few hours separating them. Running the
exercise in shorter class periods or splitting it across several weeks
is probably also feasible, but may reduce opportunities for students
to internalize and build upon feedback they receive.
6.2 Materials
The exercise functioned well with all three construction materials.
However, LEGO bricks and tiles provided a lower barrier to entry and appeared to allowed students to produce more designs and
focus more concretely on encoding operations than modeling clay.
Bricks also provided some new opportunities for encoding, including the ability to build primitive 3D shapes. Because bricks are also
relatively cheap and readily available, they may be the best first
choice for other instructors who wish to replicate the exercise.
6.3 Scalability
The total number of students in our target course (28) was not substantially larger than that of the previous VizKit workshops (< 20).
However, because it relies more heavily on peer feedback and reflection, rather than direct input from the instructors, we suspect
that the in-class version should be able to scale nicely to even larger
class sizes.
7 C ONCLUSION
Based on our initial experiences, we believe that construction exercises can provide a rich, reflective, hands-on opportunity that helps
students in visualization courses cement their understanding of basic encoding principles and trade-offs. We plan to release our classroom materials and guidelines for others to reproduce. We also
encourage other educators to reuse and adapt these designs to their
own teaching practice. Through this exchange, we hope to help encourage the development of a broader set of practical exercises for
teaching visualization.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Paul Lapides and Jagoda Walny, who helped moderate
the construction sessions, as well as all of the CPSC 583 students
who participated and gave feedback on the exercise.

R EFERENCES
[1] N. Brosterman, K. Togashi, and E. Himmel. Inventing kindergarten.
1997.
[2] L. Grammel, C. Bennett, M. Tory, and M.-a. Storey. A Survey of Visualization Construction User Interfaces. In EuroVis-Short Papers, pages
19–23. The Eurographics Association, 2013.
[3] S. Huron, S. Carpendale, A. Thudt, A. Tang, and M. Mauerer. Constructive visualization. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing
interactive systems, pages 433–442. ACM, 2014.
[4] S. Huron, Y. Jansen, and S. Carpendale. Constructing visual representations: Investigating the use of tangible tokens. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 20(12):2102–2111, 2014.
[5] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, P. Isenberg, J. Alexander, A. Karnik, J. Kildal,
S. Subramanian, and K. Hornbæk. Opportunities and challenges for
data physicalization. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15, pages 3227–
3236, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[6] Mike Bostocks. D3 workshop, 2015. Last access: 2015-07-01. http:
//bost.ocks.org/mike/d3/workshop/.
[7] J. Walny, S. Huron, and S. Carpendale. An Exploratory Study of Data
Sketching for Visual Representation. Computer Graphics Forum, pages
231–240, 2015.
[8] T. Wun, J. Payne, S. Huron, and S. Carpendale. Comparing bar chart authoring with microsoft excel and tangibletiles. In the 18th Proceedings
of the Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis), Groningen,
the Netherlands, 2016. The Eurographics Association and John Wiley
and Sons Ltd.

